Delhi Development Act, 1957_Section Preamble--> An Act to provide for the development of Delhi according to plan and for matters ancillary thereto. BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Delhi Development Act, 1957_Section 1--> (1) This Act may be called the Delhi Development Act, 1957. (2) It extends to the whole of the 1 [National Capital Territory] of Delhi. (3) It shall come into force on such date 2 as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. Substituted for "Union territory of Delhi" by the Delhi Development (Amdt) Act, 1996 with effect from . 21-12-1996 30th December, 1957, vide Notification No. Section R.O. 120, dated 30-12-1957
Delhi Development Act, 1957_Section 2--> In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- (a) "amenity" includes road, water supply, street lighting, drainage, sewerage, public works and such other convenience as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify to be an amenity for the purposes of this Act; (b) "building" includes any structure or erection or part of a structure or erection which is intended to be used for residential, industrial, commercial or other purposes, whether in actual use or not; (c) "building operations" includes rebuilding operations, structural alterations of or additions to buildings and other operation normally under-taken in connection with the construction of buildings; (d) "development" with its grammatical variations means the carrying out of building, engineering, mining or other operations in, on, over or under land or the making of any material change in any building or land and includes redevelopment; (e) "development area" means any area declared to be a development area under sub-section (7) of section 12; (f) "engineering operations" includes the formation or laying out of means of access to a road or the laying out of means of water supply; (g) "means of access" includes any means of access whether private or public, for vehicles or for foot passengers, and includes a road; (h) "regulation" means a regulation made under this Act by the Delhi Development Authority constituted under section 3; (i) "rule" means a rule made under this Act by the Central Government; (j) "to erect" in relation to any building includes-- (i) any material alteration or enlargement of any building, (ii) the conversion by structural alteration into of place for human habitation of any building not originally constructed for human habitation, (iii) the conversion into more than one place for human habitation of a building originally constructed as one such place, (iv) the conversion of two or more places of human habitation into a greater number of such places, (v) such alterations of a building as affect an alteration of its drainage or sanitary arrangements, or materially affect its security, (vi) the addition of any rooms, buildings, houses or other structures to any building, and (vii) the construction in a wall adjoining any street or land not belonging to the owner of the wall, of a door opening on to such street or land; (k) "zone" means any one of the divisions in which Delhi may be divided for the purposes of development under this Act; 1 [(1) the expression "land" shall have the meaning assigned to it in section 3 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 .] Substituted by Act 56 of 1963, Section 2, for Clause (1) (retrospectively).
Delhi Development Act, 1957_Section 3--> (1) As soon as may be after the commencement of this Act, the Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute for the purposes of this Act an authority to be called the Delhi Development Authority (hereinafter referred to as the Authority). (2) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid having perpetual succession and a common seal with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable and to contract and shall by the said name sue and be sued. (3) The Authority shall consist of the following members, namely :-- (a) a chairman who shall be the 1 [Lieutenant Governor] of the 2 [National Capital Territory] of Delhi, ex officio; (b) a vice-chairman to be appointed by the Central Government; (c) a finance and accounts member to be appointed by the Central, Government; (d) an engineer member to be appointed by the Central Government; (e) as and when the Municipal Corporation of Delhi is established, two representatives of that Corporation to be elected by the councillors and aldermen of the Corporation from among themselves; 3 [(f) three representatives of the Legislative Assembly of the National Capital Territory of Delhi to be selected by means of a single transferable vote by the members of the Legislative Assembly from among themselves of which two shall be from among the ruling party and one from the party in opposition to the Government: Provided that no member of the Council of Ministers for the Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi shall be eligible to be elected to the Authority. Explanation--For the purposes of this clause, "ruling party" and "party in opposition to Government" shall mean the ruling party and the party in opposition to the Government recognized as such by the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of the National Capital Territory of Delhi;".] 4 [(g) three other persons to be nominated by the Central Government, of whom one shall be a person with experience of town planning or architecture; and] (h) the Commissioner of the Municipal Corporation of Delhi, ex officio. 5 [(3A) The appointment of the vice-chairman may be either whole-time or part-time as the Central Government may think fit but the appointment of the finance and accounts member and the engineer member shall be whole-time.] 6 [(4) The vice-chairman, it' he is a whole-time member, the finance and accounts member and the engineer member shall be entitled to receive from the funds of the Authority such salaries and such allowances, if any, and governed by such conditions of service as may be determined by rules made in this behalf. (5) The vice-chairman, if he is a part-time member, and other members specified in clause (e), clause (f) and clause (g) of sub-section (3) may be paid from the funds of the Authority such allowances, if any, as may be fixed by the Central Government in this behalf.] (6) The vice-chairman, the finance and accounts member, the engineer member and the 7 [three members] referred to in clause (g) of sub-section (3) shall hold office during the pleasure of the Central Government 8 * * *. 9 [(7) An elected member shall hold office for a term of five years from the date of his election to the Authority and shall be eligible for re-election : Provided that such term shall come to an end as soon as the member ceases to be a member of the body from which he was elected.] (9) A member other than an ex officio member may resign his office by writing under his hand addressed to the Central Government but shall continue in office until his resignation is accepted by that Government. (10) No act or proceedings of the Authority shall be invalid by reason of the existence of any vacancy in, or defect in the constitution of, the Authority. Substituted for "Administrator" by the Delhi Development (Amdt) Act, 1996 with effect from . 21-12-1996. Substituted for "Union territory of Delhi" by the Delhi Development (Amdt) Act, 1996 with effect from . 21-12-1996. Substituted by Act 36 of 1996 with effect from 21-12-1996. Prior to Substitution it read as under:- "(Substituted by Act 19 of 1966, s, 36, for Clause (f) (w.e.f. 7-9-1966).)as and when the Metropolitan Council for the Union territory of Delhi is Constituted, three representatives of that Council to be elected by the members of the Council from among themselves, and until that Council is constituted, three representatives of the Interim Metropolitan Council to be elected by the members of the Interim Metropolitan Council from among themselves;" Substituted by Act 56 of 1963, Section 3, for Clause (g). Inserted by Act 56 of 1963, Section 3. Substituted by Act 56 of 1963, Section 3 for sub-sections (4) and (3). Substituted by Act 56 of 1963, Section 3 for "two members". Certain words omitted by Act 19 of 1966, Section 36 (w.e.f. 7-9-1966). Substituted by Act 19 of 1966, Section 36 for sub-sections (7) and (8) (w.e.f. 7-9-1966),
Delhi Development Act, 1957_Section 4--> (1) The Central Government may appoint two suitable persons respectively as the secretary and the chief accounts officer of the Authority who shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be prescribed by regulations or delegated to them by the Authority or the chairman. (2) Subject to such control and restrictions as may be prescribed by rules, the Authority may appoint such number of other officers and employees (including experts for technical work) as may be necessary for the efficient performance of its functions and may determine their designations and grades. (3) The secretary, chief accounts officer and other officers and employees of the Authority shall be entitled to receive from the funds of the Authority such salaries and such allowances, if any, and shall be governed by such conditions of service as may be determined by regulations made in this behalf.
Delhi Development Act, 1957_Section 5--> (1) The Authority shall, as soon as may be, constitute an advisory council for the purpose of advising the Authority on the preparation of the master plan and [on such other matters relating to the planning of development, or] arising out of, or in connection with, the, administration of this Act as may be referred to it by the Authority. (2) The advisory council shall consist of the following members, namely:-- (a) the chairman of the Authority, ex officio, who shall be the president; (6) two persons with knowledge of town planning or architecture to be nominated by the Central Government; (c) one representative of the Health Services of Delhi administration to be nominated by the Central Government; (d) four representatives of the Municipal Corporation of Delhi to be elected by the councillors and aldermen from among themselves; 2 [(e) two persons representing the Delhi Electric Supply Committee and the Delhi Water Supply and Sewage Disposal Committee of the said Corporation of whom-- (i) one shall be elected by the members of the Delhi Electric Supply Committee from among themselves, and (ii) one shall be elected by the members of the Delhi Water Supply and Sewage Disposal Committee from among themselves; (ee) one representative of the Delhi Transport Corporation to be nominated by the Central Government;] (f) three persons to be nominated by the Central Government of whom one shall represent the interests of commerce and industry and one, the interests of labour, in Delhi; (g) four persons from the technical departments of the Central Government to be nominated by that Government; and (h) three members of Parliament of whom two shall be members of the House of the People and one shall be a member of the Council of States to be elected respectively by the members of the House of the People and the members of the Council of Slates. (3) The Council shall meet as and when necessary and shall have the power to regulate its own procedure, (4) An elected member shall hold office for a term of four years from the date of his election to the council and shall be eligible for re-election : Provided that such term shall come to an end us soon as the member ceases to be a member of the body from which he was elected. Substituted by Act 56 of 1963, Section 4, for certain words. Substituted by Act 38 of 1984, Section 2, for Clause (e) (w.e.f. 15-3-1933).
Delhi Development Act, 1957_Section 5A--> (1) The Authority may constitute as many committees consisting wholly of members or wholly of other persons or partly of members and partly of other persons and for such purpose or purposes as it may think fit. (2) A committee constituted under this section shall meet at such time and place and shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings as may be determined by regulations made in this behalf. (3) The members of a committee (other than the members of the Authority) shall be paid such fees and allowances for attending its meetings and for attending to any other work of the Authority, as may be determined by regulations made in this behalf.] Inserted by Act 56 of 1963, Section 5.
Delhi Development Act, 1957_Section 6--> The objects of the Authority shall be to promote and secure the development of Delhi according to plan and for that purpose the Authority shall have the power to acquire, hold, manage and dispose of land and other property, to carry out building, engineering, mining and other operations, to execute works in connection with supply of water and electricity, disposal of sewage and other services and amenities and generally to do anything necessary or expedient for purposes of such development and for purposes incidental thereto : Provided that save as provided in this Act, nothing contained in this Act shall be construed as authorising the disregard by the Authority of any law for the time being in force.
Delhi Development Act, 1957_Section 7--> (1) The Authority shall, as soon as may be, carry out a civic survey of, and prepare a master plan for, Delhi. (2) The master plan shall-- (a) define the various zones into winch Delhi may be divided for the purposes of development and indicate the manner in which the land in each zone is proposed to be used (whether by the carrying out thereon of development or otherwise) and the stages by which any such development shall be carried out; and (b) serve as a basic pattern of frame-work within which the zonal development plans of the various zones may be prepared. 1 [(3) The master plan may provide for any other matter which is necessary for the proper development of Delhi.] Inserted by Act 56 of 1963, Section 6.
Delhi Development Act, 1957_Section 8--> (1) Simultaneously with the preparation of the master plan or as soon as may be thereafter, the Authority shall proceed with the preparation of a zonal development plan for each of the zones into which Delhi may be divided. (2) A zonal development plan may-- (a) contain a site-plan and use-plan for the development of the zone and show the approximate locations and extents of land-uses proposed in the zone for such things as public buildings and other public works and utilities, roads, housing, recreation, industry, business, markets, schools, hospitals and public and private open spaces and other categories of public and private uses; (b) specify the standards of population density and building density; (c) show every area in the zone which may, in the opinion of the Authority, be required or declared for development or redevelopment; and (d) in particular, contain provisions regarding all or any of the following matters, namely:-- (i) the division of any site into plots for the erection of buildings; (ii) the allotment or reservation of land for roads, open spaces, gardens, recreation grounds, schools, markets and other public purposes; (iii) the development of any area into a township or colony and the restrictions and conditions subject to which such development may be undertaken or carried out; (iv) the erection of buildings on any site and the restrictions and conditions in regard to the open spaces to be maintained in or around buildings and height and character of buildings; (v) the alignment of buildings on any site; (vi) the architectural features of the elevation or frontage of any building to be erected on any site; (vii) the number of residential buildings which may be erected on any plot or site; (viii) the amenities to be provided in relation to any site or buildings on such site whether before or after the erection of buildings and the person or authority by whom or at whose expense such amenities are to be provided; (ix) the prohibitions or restrictions regarding erection of shops, workshops, warehouses or factories or buildings of a specified architectural feature or buildings designed for particular purposes in the locality; (x) the maintenance of walls, fences, hedges or any other structural or architectural construction and the height at which they shall be maintained; (xi) the restrictions regarding the use of any site for purposes other than erection of buildings; and (xii) any other mailer which is necessary for the proper development of the zone or any area thereof according to plan and for preventing buildings being erected haphazardly in such zone or area.
Delhi Development Act, 1957_Section 9--> (1) In this section and in sections 10, 11, 12 and 14 the word "plan" means the master plan as well as the zonal development plan for a zone. (2) Every plan shall, as soon as may be after its preparation, be submitted by the Authority to the Central Government for approval and that Government may either approve the plan without modifications or with such modifications as it may consider necessary or reject the plan with directions to the Authority to prepare a fresh plan according to such directions.
Delhi Development Act, 1957_Section 10--> (1) Before preparing any plan finally and submitting it to the Central Government for approval, the Authority shall prepare a plan in draft and publish it by making a copy thereof available for inspection and publishing a notice in such form and manner as may be prescribed by rules made in this behalf inviting objections and suggestions from any person with respect to the draft plan before such date as may be specified in the notice. (2) The Authority shall also give reasonable opportunities to every local authority within whose local limits any land touched by the plan is situated, to make any representation with respect to the plan. (3) After considering all objections, suggestions and representations that may have been received by the Authority, the Authority shall finally prepare the plan and submit it to the Central Government for its approval. (4) Provisions may be made by rules made in this behalf with respect to the form and content of a plan and with respect to the procedure to be followed and any other matter, in connection with the preparation, submission and approval of such plan. (5) Subject to the foregoing provisions of this section the Central Government may direct the Authority to furnish such information as that Government may require for the purpose of approving any plan submitted to it under this section.
Delhi Development Act, 1957_Section 11--> Immediately after a plan has been approved by the Central Government, the Authority shall publish in such manner as may be prescribed by regulations a notice stating that a plan has been approved and naming a place where a copy of the plan may be inspected at all reasonable hours and upon the date of the first publication of the aforesaid notice the plan shall come into operation.
Delhi Development Act, 1957_Section 11A--> (1) The Authority may make any modifications to the master plan or the zonal development plan as it thinks fit, being modifications which, in its opinion, do not effect important alterations in the character of the plan and which do not relate to the extent of land-users or the standards of population density. (2) The Central Government may make any modifications to the master plan or the zonal development plan whether such modifications are of the nature specified in sub-section (1) or otherwise. (3) Before making any modifications to the plan, the Authority or, as the case may be, the Central Government shall publish a notice in such form and manner as may be prescribed by rules made in this behalf inviting objections and suggestions from any person with respect to the pronbsed modifications before such date as may be specified in the notice and shall consider all objections and suggestions that may be received by the Authority or the Central Government. (4) Every modification made under the provisions of this section shall be published in such manner as the Authority or the Central Government, as the case may be, may specify and the modifications shall come into operation either on the date of the publication or on such other date as the Authority or the Central Government may fix. (5) When the Authority makes any modifications to the plan under sub-section (7) it shall report to the Central Government the full particulars of such modifications within thirty days of the date on which such modifications come into operation. (6) If any question arises whether the modifications proposed to be made by the Authority are modifications which cfi'cct important alterations in the character of the plan or whether they relate to the extent of land-uses or the standards of population density, it shall be referred to the Central Government whose decision thereon shall be final. (7) Any reference in any other Chapter, except Chapter 111, to the master plan or the zonal development plan shall be construed as a reference to the master plan or the zonal development plan as modified under the provisions of this section.]
Delhi Development Act, 1957_Section 12--> [(1) As soon as may be after the commencement of this Act, the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare any area in Delhi to be a development area for the purposes of this Act : Provided that no such declaration shall be made unless a proposal for such declaration has been referred by the Central Government to the Authority and the Municipal Corporation of Delhi for expressing their views thereon within thirty days from the date of the receipt of the reference or within such further period as the Central Government may allow and the period so specified or allowed has expired.] (2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the Authority shall not undertake or carry out any development of land in any area which is not a development area. (3) After the commencement of this Act no development of land shall be undertaken or carried out in any area by any person or body (including a department of Government) unless,-- (i) where that area is a development area, permission for such development has been obtained in writing from the Authority in accordance with the provision of this Act, (ii) where that area is an area other than a development area, approval of, or sanction for, such development has been obtained in writing from the local authority concerned or any officer or authority thereof empowered or authorised in this behalf, in accordance with the provisions made by or under the law governing such authority or until such provisions have been made, in accordance with the provisions of the regulations relating to the grant of permission for development made under the Delhi (Control of Building Operations) Act, 1955, and in force immediately before the commencement of this Act, 53 of 1955: Provided that the local authority concerned may 2 [subject to the provisions of section 53A] amend those regulations in their application to such area. (4) After the coming into operation of any of the plans in any area no development shall be undertaken or carried out in that area unless such development is also in accordance with such plans, (5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (3) and (4) development of any land begun by any department of Government or any local authority before the commencement of this Act may be completed by that department or local authority without compliance with the requirements of those sub-sections. Substituted by Act 56 of 1963, Section 8, for sub-section (1). Substituted by Act 56 of 1963, Section 8, for sub-section (1).
Delhi Development Act, 1957_Section 13--> (1) Every person or body (including a department of Government) desiring to obtain the permission referred to in section 12 shall make an application in writing to the Authority in such form and containing such particulars in respect of the development to which the application relates as may be prescribed by regulations. (2) Every application under sub-section (1) shall be accompanied by such fee as may be prescribed by rules : Provided that no such fee shall be necessary in the case of an application made by a department of the Government. (3) On the receipt of an application for permission under sub-section (1), the Authority after making such inquiry as it considers necessary in relation to any matter specified in clause (d) of sub-section (2) of section 8 or in relation to any other matter, shall, by order in writing, either grant the permission, subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the order or refuse to grant such permission : Provided that before making an order refusing such permission, the applicant shall be given a reasonable opportunity to show cause why the permission should not be refused. (4) Where permission is refused, the grounds of such refusal shall be recorded in writing and communicated to the applicant in the manner prescribed by regulations. (5) The Authority shall keep in such form as may be prescribed by regulations a register of applications for permission under this section. (6) The said register shall contain such particulars including information as to the manner in which applications for permission have been dealt with as may be prescribed by regulations and shall be available for inspection by any member of the public at all reasonable hours on payment of such fee not exceeding rupees five as may be prescribed by regulations. (7) Where permission is refused under this section, the applicant or any person claiming through him shall hot be entitled to get refund of the fee paid on the application for permission but the Authority may, on an application for refund being made within three months of the communication of the grounds of the refusal under sub-section (4) direct refund of such portion of the fee as to it may seem proper in the circumstances of the case.
Delhi Development Act, 1957_Section 14--> After the coming into operation of any of the plans in a zone no person shall use or permit to be used any land or building in that zone otherwise than in conformity with such plan : Provided that it shall be lawful to continue to use upon such terms and conditions as may be prescribed by regulations made in this behalf any land or building for the purpose and to the extent for and to which it is being used upon the date on which such plan comes into force.
Delhi Development Act, 1957_Section 15--> (1) If in the opinion of the Central Government, any land is required for the purpose of development, or for any other purpose, under this Act, the Central Government may acquire such land under the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, (2) Where any land has been acquired by the Central Government, that Government may, after it has taken possession of the land, transfer the land to the Authority or any local authority for the purpose for which the land has been acquired on payment by the Authority or the local authority of the compensation awarded under that Act and of the charges incurred by the Government in connection with the acquisition.] Substituted by Act 56 of 1963, Section 9, for Section 15 (retrospectively).
Delhi Development Act, 1957_Section 16--> Compensation for compulsory acquisition of land. Repealed by the Delhi Development (Amendment) Act, 1963 (56 of 1963), s. 10 (retrospectively).
Delhi Development Act, 1957_Section 17--> Appeal to the district judge against decision of the collector. Repealed by the Delhi Development (Amendment) Act, 1963 (56 of 1963), s. 10 (retrospectively).
Delhi Development Act, 1957_Section 18--> Disputes as to apportionment of the compensation.] Repealed by the Delhi Development (Amendment) Act, 1963 (56 of 1963), s. 10 (retrospectively).
Delhi Development Act, 1957_Section 19--> Payment of compensation or deposit of the name in court.] Repealed by the Delhi Development (Amendment) Act, 1963 (56 of 1963), s. 10 (retrospectively).
Delhi Development Act, 1957_Section 20--> Investment of the amount of compensation deposited in court], Repealed by the Delhi Development (Amendment) Act, 1963 (56 of 1963), s. 10 (retrospectively).
Delhi Development Act, 1957_Section 21--> (1) Subject to any directions given by the Central Government under this Act, the Authority or, as the case may be, the local authority concerned may dispose of:- (a) any land acquired by the Central Government and transferred to it, without undertaking or carrying out any development thereon; or (b) any such land after undertaking or carrying out such development as it thinks fit, to such persons, in such manner and subject to such terms and conditions as it considers expedient for securing the development of Delhi according to plan. (2) The powers of the Authority or, as the case may be, the local authority concerned with respect to the disposal of land under sub-section (7) shall be so exercised as to secure, so far as practicable, that persons who are living or carrying on business or other activities on the land shall, if they desire to obtain accommodation on land belonging to the Authority or the local authority concerned and are willing to comply with any requirements of the Authority or the local authority concerned as to its development and use, have an opportunity to obtain thereon accommodation suitable to their reasonable requirements on terms settled with due regard to the price at which any such land has been acquired from them : Provided that where the Authority or the local authority concerned proposes to dispose of by sale any land without any development having been undertaken or carried out thereon, it shall offer the land in the first instance to the persons from whom it was acquired, if they desire to purchase it subject to such requirements as to its development and use as the Authority or the local authority concerned may think fit to impose. (3) Nothing m this Act shall be construed as enabling the Authority or the local authority concerned to dispose of land by way of gift, mortgage or charge, but subject as aforesaid reference in this Act to the disposal of land shall be construed as reference to the disposal thereof in any manner, whether by-way of sale, exchange or lease or by the creation of any easement right or privilege or otherwise.
Delhi Development Act, 1957_Section 22--> (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official] Gazette and upon such terms and conditions as may be agreed upon between that Government and the Authority, place at the disposal of the Authority all or any developed and undeveloped lands in Delhi vested in the Union (known arid hereinafter referred to as "nazul lards") for the purpose of development in accordance with the provisions of this Act. (2) No development of any nazul land shall be undertaken or carried out except by, or under the control and supervision of, the Authority after such land has been placed at the disposal of the Authority under sub-section (7). (3) After any such nazul land has been developed by, or under the control and supervision of the Authority, it shall be dealt with by the Authority in accordance with rules made and directions given by the Central Government in this behalf. (4) If any nazul land placed at the disposal of the Authority under sub-section (1) is required at any time thereafter by the Central Government, the Authority shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, replace it at the disposal of that Government upon such terms and conditions as may be agreed upon between that Government and the Authority.
Delhi Development Act, 1957_Section 22A--> Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2) of section 12, the Authority may, if it is of opinion that it is expedient to do so, undertake or carry out any development of any land which has been transferred to it or placed as its disposal under section 15 or section 22 even if such land is situate in any area which is not a development area.] Inserted. by Act 56 of 1963, Section 11.
Delhi Development Act, 1957_Section 23--> (1) The Authority shall have and maintain its own fund to which shall be credited-- (a) all moneys received by the Authority from the Central Government by way of grants, loans, advances or otherwise; 1 [(aa) all moneys borrowed by the Authority from sources other than the Central Government by way of loans or debentures;] (b) all fees and charges received by the Authority under this Act; (c) all moneys received by the Authority from the disposal of lands, buildings and other properties, movable and immovable; and (d) all moneys received by the Authority by way of rents and profits or in any other manner or from any other source. (2) The fund shall be applied towards meeting the expenses incurred by the Authority in the administration of this Act and for no other purposes. (3) The Authority may keep in current account of the State Bank of India or any other bank approved by the Central Government in this behalf such sum of money out of its fund as may be prescribed by rules and any money in excess of the said sum shall be invested in such manner as may be approved by the Central Government. (4) The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, make such grants, advances and loans to the Authority as that Government may deem necessary for the performance of the functions of the Authority under this Act; and all grants, loans and advances made shall be on such terms and conditions as the Central Government may determine. (5) The Authority may borrow money by wav of loans or debentures from such sources (other than the Central Government) and on such terms and conditions as may be approved by the Central Government. (6) The Authority shall maintain" a sinking: fund for the repayment of moneys borrowed under sub-section (5), and shall pay every year into the sinking fund such sum as may be sufficient for repayment within the period fixed of all moneys so borrowed. (7) The sinking fund or any part thereof shall be applied in, or towards, the discharge of the loan for which such fund was created, and until such loan is wholly discharged it shall not be applied for any other purpose.] Inserted by Section 12, Act 56 of 1963, Section 11.
Delhi Development Act, 1957_Section 24--> The Authority shall prepare in such form and at such time every year as may be prescribed by rules a budget in respect of the financial year next ensuing showing the estimated receipts and expenditure of the Authority an shall forward to the Central Government such number of copies thereof as may be prescribed by rules.
Delhi Development Act, 1957_Section 25--> (1) The Authority shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts including the balance-sheet in such form as the Central Government may by rules prescribe in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. (2) The accounts of the Authority shall be subject to audit annually by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any expenditure incurred by him in connection with such audit shall be payable by the Authority to the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India, (3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any person appointed by him in connection with the audit of accounts of the Authority shall have the same right, privilege and authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India has in connection with the audit of the Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect the office of the Authority. (4) The accounts of the Authority as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or any other person appointed by him in this behalf together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded annually to the Central Government and that Government shall cause a copy of the same to be laid before both Houses of Parliament.
Delhi Development Act, 1957_Section 26--> The Authority shall prepare for every year a report of its activities during that year and submit the report to the Central Government in such form and on or before such date as may be prescribed by rules, and that Government shall cause a copy of the report to be laid before both Houses of Parliament.
Delhi Development Act, 1957_Section 27--> (1) The Authority shall constitute for the benefit of its whole-time paid members and of its officers and other employees in such manner and subject to such conditions, as may be prescribed by rules, such pension and provident funds as it may deem fit. (2) Where any such pension or provident fund has been constituted, the Central Government may declare that the provisions of the Provident Funds Act, 1925, 19 of 1925 shall apply to such fund as if it were a Government Provident Fund.
Delhi Development Act, 1957_Section 28--> The Authority may authorise any person to enter into or upon any land or building with or without assistants or workmen for the purpose of-- (a) making any enquiry, inspection, measurement or survey or taking levels of such land or building; (b) examining works under construction and ascertaining the course of sewers and drains; (c) digging or boring into the sub-soil; (d) setting out boundaries and intended lines of work; (e) making such levels, boundaries and lines by placing marks and cutting trenches; (f) ascertaining whether any land is being or has been developed in contravention of the master plan or zonal development plan or without the permission referred to in section 12 or in contravention of any condition subject to which such permission has been granted; or (g) doing any other thing necessary for the efficient administration of this Act; Provided that-- (i) no such entry shall be made except between the hours of sunrise and sunset and without giving reasonable notice to the occupier, or if there be no occupier, to the owner of the land or building; (ii) sufficient opportunity shall in every instance be given to enable women (if any) to withdraw from such land or building; (iii) due regard shall always be had, so far as may be compatible with the exigencies of the purpose for which the entry is made, to the social and religious usages of the occupants of the land or building entered.
Delhi Development Act, 1957_Section 29--> (1) Any person who whether at his own instance or at the instance of any other person or any body (including a department of Government) under-takes or carries out development of any land in contravention of the master plan or zonal development piaa or without the permission, approval or sanction referred to in section 12 or in contravention of any condition subject to which such permission, approval or sanction has been granted, 1 [shall be punishable,-- (a) with rigorous imprisonment which may extend to three years, if such development relates to utilising, selling or otherwise dealing with any land with a view to the setting up of a colony without a lay out plan; and (b) with simple imprisonment which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to live thousand rupees, or with both, in any case, other than those referred to in clause" (a).] (2) Any person who uses any land or building in contravention of the provisions of section 14 or in contravention of any terms and conditions prescribed by regulations under the proviso to that section shall be punishable with fine which may extend to live thousand rupees 2 [and in the case of a continuing offence, with further fine which may extend to two hundred and fifty rupees for every day during which such offence continues after conviction for the first commission of the offence]. (3) Any person who obstructs the entry of a person authorised under section 28 to enter into or upon any land or building or inofest such person after such entry snail be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or will line which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. Substituted. by Act 38 of 1984, s, 3, for certain words (w.e.f, 15-3-1985). Inserted by Act 56 of 1963, Section 13.
Delhi Development Act, 1957_Section 30--> [(1) Where any development has been commenced or is being carried on or has been completed in contravention of the master plan or zonal development plan or without the permission, approval or sanction referred to in section 12 or in contravention of any conditions subject to which such permission, approval or sanction has been granted,:- (i) in relation to a development area, any officer of the Authority empowered, by it in this behalf, (ii) in relation to any other area within the local limits of a local authority, the competent authority thereof, may, in addition to any prosecution that may be instituted under this Act, make an order directing that such development shall be removed by demolition, tilling or otherwise by the owner thereof or by the person at whose instance the development has been commenced or is being carried put or has been completed, within such period (not being less than five days and more than fifteen days from the date on which a copy of the order of removal, with a brief statement of the reasons therefor, has been delivered to the owner or that person) as may be specified in the order and on his failure to comply with the order, the officer of the Authority or, as the case may be, the competent authority may remove or cause to be removed the development and the expenses of such removal shall be recovered from the owner or the person at whose instance the development was commenced or was being carried out or was completed as arrears of land revenue: Provided that no such order shall be made unless the owner or the person concerned has been given a reasonable opportunity to show cause why the order should not be made. (1A) If any development in an area other than; a development area has teen commenced or is being carried on or has been completed in contravention of the master plan or zonal development plan or without the approval or sanction referred to in section 12 or in contravention of any conditions subject to which such approval or sanction has been granted and the competent authority has failed to remove or cause to be removed the development within the time that may be specified in this behalf by the 2 [Lieutenant Governor] of the 3 [National Capital Territory] of Delhi, the 4 [Lieutenant Governor] may, after observing such procedure as may be prescribed by rules made in this behalf, direct any officer to remove or cause to be removed such development and that officer shall be bound to carry out such direction and any expenses of such removal may be recovered from the owner or the person at whose instance the development was commenced or was being carried out or was completed as arrears of land revenue.] 5 (2) Any person aggrieved by an order under sub-section (1) may appeal to the chairman of the Authority against that order within thirty days from the date thereof; and the chairman may after hearing the parties to the appeal either allow or dismiss the appeal or may reverse or vary any part of the order. 6 [(2A) Any person aggrieved by the direction of the 7 [Lieutenant Governor] under sub-section. (1A) may appeal to the Central Government within thirty days from the date thereof, and the Central Government may after giving an opportunity of hearing to the person aggrieved, either allow or dismiss the appeal or may reverse or vary any part of the direction.] 8 [(3) The decision of 9 the Chairman or the Central Government on the appeal and subject only to such decision the order under sub-section (7) or, as the case may be, the direction under sub-section (1A), shall be final and shall not be questioned in any court. (4) The provisions of this section shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, any other provision relating to demolition of buildings contained in any other law for the time being in force.] Substituted by Act 56 of 1963Section 14, for sub-section (1). Substituted for "Administrator" by the Delhi Development (Amdt) Act, 1996 with effect from . 21-12-1996. Substituted for "Union territory of Delhi" by the Delhi Development (Amdt) Act, 1996 with effect from . 1-12-1996. Substituted for "Administrator" by the Delhi Development (Amdt) Act, 1996 with effect from . 21-12-1996. omitted by Act 38 of 1984, Section 4 (date to be notified). Inserted by Act 56 of 1963, Section 14. Substituted for "Administrator" by the Delhi Development (Amdt) Act, 1996 with effect from . 21-12-1996. Substituted by Act 56 of 1963Section 14,., for sub-section (3). Substituted for the portion beginning with the words "the chairman" and ending with the words "as the case may be,' by Act 38 of 1984, Section 4 (date to be notified) as follows;"The Central Government on, the appeal and subject only to such decision".
Delhi Development Act, 1957_Section 31--> (1) Where any development in any area has been commenced in contravention of the master plan or zonal development plan or without the permission, approval or sanction referred to in section 12 or in contravention of any conditions subject to which such permission, approval or sanction has been granted,:- (i) in relation to a development area, the Authority or any officer of the Authority empowered by it in this behalf, (ii) in relation to any other area within the local limits of a local authority, the competent authority thereof, may, in addition to any prosecution that may be instituted under this Act, make an order requiring the development to be discontinued on and from the date of the service of the order, and such order shall be complied with accordingly. (2) Where such development is not discontinued in pursuance of the order under sub-section (1), the Authority or the officer of the Authority or the competent authority, as the case may be, may require any police officer to remove the person by whom the development has been commenced and all his assistants and workmen from the place of development [or to seize any construction material, tool, machinery, scaffolding or other things used in such development within such time as may be specified in the requisition and such police officer shall comply with the requisition accordingly. 2 [(2A) Any of the things caused to be seized by the Authority or the officer of the Authority or the competent authority, as the case may be, under sub-section (2) shall unless the owner thereof turns up to take back such things and pays to the Authority, the officer of the Authority or the competent authority, as the case may be, the charges for the removal or storage of such things, be disposed of by it or him by public auction or in such other manner and within such time as the Authority, the officer of the Authority or the competent authority thinks fit. (2B) The charges for the removal and storage of the things sold under sub-section (2A) shall be paid out of the proceeds of the sale thereof and the balance, if any, shall be paid to the owner of the things sold on a claim being made therefor within a period of one year from the date of sale, and if no such claim is made within the said period, shall be credited to the fund of the Authority or the competent authority, as the case may be.] (3) If any development in an area other than a development area has been commenced in contravention of the master plan or zonal development plan or without the approval or sanction referred to in section 12 or in contravention of any conditions subject to which such approval or sanction has been granted and the competent authority has failed to make an order under sub-section (7) or, as the case may be, a requisition under sub-section (2), within the time that may be specified in this behalf by the 3 [Lieutenant Governor] of the 4 [National Capital Territory] of Delhi, the 5 [Lieutenant Governor] may, after observing such procedure as may be prescribed by rules made in this behalf, direct any officer to make the order or requisition, as the case may be, and that officer shall be bound to carry out such direction and the order or requisition made by him in pursuance of the direction shall be complied with accordingly. (4) After the requisition under sub-section (2) or sub-section (5) has been complied with, the Authority or the competent authority or the officer to whom the direction was issued by the 6 [Lieutenant Governor] under sub-section (3), as the case may be, may depute by a written order a police officer or an officer or employee of the Authority or local authority concerned to watch the place in order to ensure that the development is not continued. (5) Any person failing to comply with an order under sub-section (7) or, as the case may be, under sub-section (3), shall be punishable with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees for every day during which the non-compliance continues after the service of the order. (6) No compensation shall be claimable by any person for any damage which he may sustain in consequence of the removal of any development under section 30 or the discontinuance of the development under this section. 7 (7) In section 30 and in this section, "competent authority" in relation to a local authority means any authority or officer of that local authority empowered or authorised to order demolition or stoppage of buildings or works, in accordance with the provisions made by or under the law governing such local authority. (8) The provisions of this section shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, any other provision relating to stoppage of building operations contained in any other law for the tune being in force.] Substituted by Act 56 of 1963, Section 15, for Section 31. Inserted by Act 38 of 1984, 8. 5 (w.e.f, 12-3-1985). Substituted for "Administrator" by the Delhi Development (Amdt) Act, 1996 with effect from . 21-12-1996. Substituted for "Union territory of Delhi" by the Delhi Development (Amdt) Act, 1996 with effect from . 1-12-1996. Substituted for "Administrator" by the Delhi Development (Amdt) Act, 1996 with effect from . 21-12-1996. Substituted for "Administrator" by the Delhi Development (Amdt) Act, 1996 with effect from . 21-12-1996. Sub-section (7) shall stand omitted by Section 5, Act 38 of 1984, 8. 5 (w.e.f, 12-3-1985).
Delhi Development Act, 1957_Section 31A--> (1) It shall be lawful for the Authority or the competent authority, as the cape may be, at, any time, before or after making an order, for the removal or discontinuance of any development under section 30 or section 31, to make an order directing the sealing of such development in the manner prescribed by rules, for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this Act, or for preventing any dispute as to the nature and extent of such development. (2) Where any development has been sealed, the Authority or the competent authority, as the case may be, may, for the purpose of removing or discontinuing such development order the seal to be removed. (3) No person shall remove such seal except-- (a) under an order made by the Authority or the competent authority under sub-section (2); or (b) under an order of the Appellate Tribunal or the 2 [Lieutenant Governor] of the 3 [National Capital Territory] of Delhi, made in an appeal under this Act. Inserted by Section 6, Act 38 of 1984, 8. 5 (w.e.f, 12-3-1985). Substituted for "Administrator" by the Delhi Development (Amdt) Act, 1996 with effect from . 21-12-1996. Substituted for "Union territory of Delhi" by the Delhi Development (Amdt) Act, 1996 with effect from . 1-12-1996.
Delhi Development Act, 1957_Section 31B--> The Appellate Tribunal or Appellate Tribunals constituted under, section 347A of the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957, 66 of 1957 shall be deemed to be the Appellate Tribunal or Appellate Tribunals for deciding appeals under section 31C, and the provisions of section 347A and section 347C of the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957, and the rules made thereunder, shall, so far as may be, apply for the purposes of this Act as they apply for the purposes of that Act.
Delhi Development Act, 1957_Section 31C--> (1) Any person aggrieved by any of the following orders made under this Act, may prefer an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal, namely:-- (a) an order of the Authority granting or refusing to grant permission for development under sub-section (5) of section 13; (b) an order of the Authority or the local authority disposing of any land under section 21; (c) an order of the Authority in the course of dealing with any nazul land developed by it under section 22; (d) an order of an officer of the Authority or the competent authority made under sub-section (1) of section 30, for the removal of any development; (e) an order of the Authority or an officer of the Authority, or the competent authority made under sub-section (7) of section 31, for discontinuing any development; (f) an order of the Authority or the competent authority made under section 31 A, directing the scaling of any development. (2) An anneal under this section shall be filed within thirty days from the date of the order appealed against : Provided that the Appellate Tribunal may entertain an anneal after the expiry of the said period of thirty days if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not filing it within that period. (3) An appeal to the Appellate Tribunal shall be made in such form and shall be accompanied by a copy of the order appealed against and by such fees as may prescribed by rules.
Delhi Development Act, 1957_Section 31D--> (1) An appeal shall lie to the 1 [Lieutenant Governor] of the 2 [National Capital Territory] of Delhi against an order of the Appellate Tribunal, confirming, modifying or annulling an order of the Authority, officer of the Authority, local authority or competent authority, as the case may be, under this Act. (2) The provision of sub-sections (2) and (3) of section 31C and the provisions of section 347C of the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957, 66 of 1957 and the rules made thereunder, shall, so for as may be apply to the filing and disposal of an appeal under this section as they apply to the filing and disposal of an appeal under the said section 31C. (3) An order of the 3 [Lieutenant Governor] on an appeal under this section, and subject only to such order, an order of the Appellate Tribunal under section 31C and subject to such orders of the 4 [Lieutenant Governor] or art Appellate Tribunal, an order of the Authority, officer of the Authority, local authority or competent authority referred to in sub-section (1) of that section shall be final. Explanation.--In sections 30, 31, 31A and 31D, "competent authority" in relation to a local authority means any authority or officer of that local authority empowered or authorised to order demolition or stoppage of buildings or works in accordance with the provisions made by or under the law governing such local authority. Substituted for "Administrator" by the Delhi Development (Amdt) Act, 1996 with effect from . 21-12-1996. Substituted for "Union territory of Delhi" by the Delhi Development (Amdt) Act, 1996 with effect from . 1-12-1996. Substituted for "Administrator" by the Delhi Development (Amdt) Act, 1996 with effect from . 21-12-1996. Substituted for "Administrator" by the Delhi Development (Amdt) Act, 1996 with effect from . 21-12-1996.
Delhi Development Act, 1957_Section 31E--> (1) After the commencement of section 6 of the Delhi Development (Amendment) Act, 1984, no court shall entertain any suit, application or other proceedings in respect of any order appealable under section 31C, and no such order shall be called in question otherwise than by preferring an appeal under that section. (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), every suit, application or other proceeding pending in any court immediately before the commencement of section 6 of the Delhi Development (Amendment) Act, 1984, in respect of any order, appealable under section 31C shall continue to be dealt with and disposed of by that court as if the said section had not been brought into force.]
Delhi Development Act, 1957_Section 36--> Where any area has been developed by the Authority, the Authority may require the local authority within whose local limits the area so developed is situated, to assume responsibility for the maintenance of the amenities which have been provided in the area by the Authority and for the provision of the amenities which have not been provided by the Authority but which in its opinion should be provided in the area, on terms and conditions agreed upon between the Authority and that local authority; and where such terms and conditions cannot be agreed upon, on terms and conditions settled by the Central Government in consultation with the local authority on a reference of the matter to that Government by the Authority.
Delhi Development Act, 1957_Section 32--> (1) If the person committing an offence under this" Act is a company, every person, who, at the time the offence was committed was in charge of and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly : Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person liable to any punishment provided in this Act if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (7) where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with, the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. Explanation.--For the purposes of this section-- (a) "company" means a body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; and (b) "director" in relation to a firm means a partner in the firm.
Delhi Development Act, 1957_Section 33--> All fines realised in connection with prosecutions under this Act shall be paid to the Authority or, as the case may be, the local authority concerned.
Delhi Development Act, 1957_Section 34--> [(1) Any offence made punishable by or under this Act may, either before or after the institution of proceedings, be compounded:- (i) in the case of an offence referred to in sub-section (2) of section 49, by the 2 [Lieutenant Governor] of the 3 [National Capital Territory] of Delhi or any officer authorised by him in this behalf by general or special order; and (ii) in any other case, by the Authority or, as the case may be, the local authority concerned or any person authorised by the Authority of such local authority by general or special order in this behalf.] (2) Where an offence has been compounded, the offender, if in custody shall be discharged and no further proceedings shall be taken against him in respect of the offence compounded. Substituted by Act 56 of 1963, Section 16, for sub-section (1). Substituted for "Administrator" by the Delhi Development (Amdt) Act, 1996 with effect from . 21-12-1996. Substituted for "Union territory of Delhi" by the Delhi Development (Amdt) Act, 1996 with effect from . 1-12-1996.
Delhi Development Act, 1957_Section 34A--> The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, 2 of 1974 shall apply to an offence under sub-section (7) of section 29 as if it were a cognizable offence,-- (i) for the purposes of investigation of such offence; and (ii) for the purposes of all matters other than--(1) matters referred to in section 42 of that Code, and (2) arrest of a person except on the complaint of, or upon information received from :-- (a) such officer of the Authority not below the rank of a Director as may be appointed by the 2 [Lieutenant Governor] of the 3 [National Capital Territory] of Delhi, if the offence is committed in relation to a development area; (b) such officer of the Municipal Corporation of Delhi not below the rank of a Deputy Commissioner as may be appointed by the 4 [Lieutenant Governor] of the 5 [National Capital Territory] of Delhi, if the offence is committed in relation to any area within the local limits of that Corporation; or (c) the Secretary, New Delhi Municipal Committee, if the offence is committed in relation to any area within the local limits of that Committee : Provided that no offence which relates to any deviation from the permission, approval or sanction given under section 12 and which could be compounded under the provisions of this Act, shall be cognizable.] Inserted by Act 38 of 1984, Section 7 (w.e.f. 15-3-1985). Substituted for "Administrator" by the Delhi Development (Amdt) Act, 1996 with effect from . 21-12-1996. Substituted for "Union territory of Delhi" by the Delhi Development (Amdt) Act, 1996 with effect from . 1-12-1996. Substituted for "Administrator" by the Delhi Development (Amdt) Act, 1996 with effect from . 21-12-1996. Substituted for "Union territory of Delhi" by the Delhi Development (Amdt) Act, 1996 with effect from . 1-12-1996.
Delhi Development Act, 1957_Section 35--> (1) If the Authority, after holding a local enquiry or upon report from any of its officers or other information in its possession, is satisfied that any amenity in relation to any land in development area has not been provided in relation to that land which in the opinion of the Authority is to be provided, of that any development of the land for which permission, approval or sanction has been obtained under this Act has not been carried out, it may, after affording a reasonable opportunity to show cause, serve upon the owner of the laud or upon the person providing or responsible for providing the amenity a notice requiring him to provide the amenity or carry out the development within such time as may be specified in the notice. (2) If any amenity is not provided or any such development is not carried out within the time specified in the notice, then the Authority may itself provide the amenity or carry out the development or have it provided or carried out through such agency as it deems fit: Provided that before taking any action under this sub-section, the Authority shall afford reasonable opportunity to the owner of the land or to the person providing or responsible for providing the amenity to show cause as to why such action should not taken. (3) All expenses incurred by the Authority or the agency employed by it in providing the amenity or carrying out the development together with interest at such rate as the Central Government may by order fix from the date when a demand for the expenses is made until payment may be recovered by the Authority from the owner or the person providing or responsible for providing the amenity as arrears of land revenue.] Substituted by Act 56 of 1963, Section 17, for Section 35.
Delhi Development Act, 1957_Section 36--> Where any area has been developed by the Authority, the Authority may require the local authority within whose local limits the area so developed is situated, to assume responsibility for the maintenance of the amenities which have been provided in the area by the Authority and for the provision of the amenities which have not been provided by the Authority but which in its opinion should be provided in the area, on terms and conditions agreed upon between the Authority and that local authority; and where such terms and conditions cannot be agreed upon, on terms and conditions settled by the Central Government in consultation with the local authority on a reference of the matter to that Government by the Authority.
Delhi Development Act, 1957_Section 37--> (1) Where, in the opinion of the Authority, as a consequence of any development having been executed by the Authority in any development area, the value of any property in that area or in any area other than the development area, which has been benefited by the development, has increased or will increase, the Authority shall be entitled to levy upon the owner of the property or any person having an interest therein a betterment charge in respect of the increase in value of the property resulting from the execution of the development:- Provided that no betterment charge shall be levied in respect of lands owned by Government within Delhi: Provided further that where any land belonging to Government has been let out by Government to any person, then that land and any building situate thereon shall be subject to a betterment charge under this section. (2) Such betterment charge shall be an amount:- (i) in respect of any property situate in a development area, equal to one-third of the amount, and (ii) in respect of property situate in any other area, not exceeding one-third of the amount, by which the value of the property on the completion of the execution of the development scheme estimated as if the property were clear of buildings exceeds the value of the property prior to such execution estimated in like manner: Provided that in levying betterment charge on any property under clause (ii), the Authority shall have regard to the extent and nature of benefit accruing to the property from the development and such other factors as may be prescribed by rules made in this behalf.] Substituted by Act 56 of 1963, Section 18, for Section 37.
Delhi Development Act, 1957_Section 38--> (1) When it appears to the Authority that any particular development scheme is sufficiently advanced to enable the amount of the betterment charge to be determined, the Authority may, by an order made in this behalf, declare that for the purpose of determining the betterment charge the execution of the scheme shall be deemed to have been completed and shall thereupon give notice in writing to the owner of the property or any person having an interest therein that the Authority proposes to assess the amount of the betterment charge in respect of the property under section 37. (2) The Authority shall then assess the amount of betterment charge payable by the person concerned after giving such person an opportunity to be heard and such person shall, within three mouths from the date of receipt of the notice in writing of such assessment from the Authority, inform the Authority by a declaration in writing that he accepts the assessment or dissents, from it. (3) When the assessment proposed by the Authority is accepted by the person concerned within the period specified in sub-section (2) such assessment shall be final. (4) If the person concerned dissents from the assessment or fails to give the Authority the information required by sub-section (2) within the period specified therein the matter shall be determined by arbitrators in the manner provided in section 39.
Delhi Development Act, 1957_Section 39--> (1) For the determination of the matter referred to in sub-section (4) of section 38, the Central Government shall appoint three arbitrators of whom one at least shall have special knowledge of the valuation of land. (2) The arbitrators shall follow such procedure as may be prescribed by rules made in this behalf. 1 [(2A) The arbitrators shall, for the purpose of determining any matter referred to them, have the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, 5 of 1908 when trying a suit, in Respect of the following matters, namely :-- (a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath; (b) requiring the discovery and production of documents; (c) administering to any party to the arbitration such interrogatories as may, in the opinion of the arbitrators, be necessary.] (3) In the event of any difference of opinion among the arbitrators the decision of the majority shall prevail and that decision shall be the award of the arbitrators. (4) If any arbitrator dies, resigns, or is removed under sub-section (5) or refuses, or neglects in the opinion of the Central Government, to perform his duties or becomes incapable of performing the same, then the Central Government shall forthwith appoint another fit person to take the place of such arbitrator. (5) If the Central Government is satisfied after such inquiry as it thinks fit- (a) that an arbitrator has misconducted himself, the Central Government may remove him from his office; (b) that the award of the arbitrators has been improperly procured or that any arbitrator has misconducted himself in connection with such award, the Central Government may set aside the award. (6) An award which has not been set aside by the Central Government under clause (6) of sub-section (5) shall be final and shall not be questioned in any court. (7) The provisions of the Arbitration Act, 1940, 10 of 1940 shall not apply to arbitration under this section. Inserted by Section 19 Act 56 of 1963, Section 18, for Section 37.
Delhi Development Act, 1957_Section 40--> (1) The betterment charge levied under this Act shall be payable in such number of instalments and each instalment shall be payable at such time and in such manner as may be fixed by regulations made in this behalf. (2) Any arrear of betterment charge shall be recoverable as an arrear of land revenue.
Delhi Development Act, 1957_Section 40A--> Any money due to the Authority on account of fees or charges, or from the disposal of lands, buildings or other properties, movable or immovable, or by way of rents and profits may, if the recovery thereof is not expressly provided for in any other provision of this Act, be recovered by the Authority as arrears of land revenue.] Inserted by Act 56 of 1963. Section 20.
Delhi Development Act, 1957_Section 41--> (1) The Authority shall carry out such directions as may be issued to it from time to time by the Central Government for the efficient administration, of this Act. (2) If in, or in connection with, the exercise of its powers and discharge of its functions by the Authority under this Act, any dispute arises between the Authority and the Central Government the decision of the Central Government on such dispute shall be final. 1 [(3) The Central Government may at any time, either on its own motion or on application made to it in this behalf, call for the records of any case disposed of or order passed by the Authority for the purpose of satisfying itself as to the legality or propriety of any order passed or direction issued and may pass such order or issue such direction in relation thereto as it may think fit: Provided that the Central Government shall not pass an order prejudicial to any person without affording such person a reasonable opportunity of being heard.] Inserted by Section 21, Act 56 of 1963. Section 20.
Delhi Development Act, 1957_Section 42--> (1) The Authority shall furnish to the Central Government such reports, returns and other information as that Government may from time to tune require. (2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (7), the Central Government or any officer authorised by the Central Government in this behalf, may call for reports, returns and other information from the Authority or local authority in regard to the implementation of the master plan. (3) Any person authorised by the Central Government or the officer referred to in sub-section (2) may enter-into or upon, any land with or without assistants or workmen for ascertaining whether the provisions of the master plan are being or have been implemented, or whether the development is being or has been carried out in accordance with such plan. (4) No such entry shall be made except between the hours of sunrise and sunset and without giving reasonable notice to the occupier, or if there be no occupier, to the owner of the land or building,] Substituted by Act 56 of 1963, Section 22, for s, 47.
Delhi Development Act, 1957_Section 43--> (1) All notices, orders and other documents required by this Act or any rule or regulation made thereunder to be served upon any person shall, save as otherwise provided in this Act or such rule or regulation, be deemed to be duly served:- (a) where the person to be served is a company if the document is addressed to the secretary of the company at its registered office or at its principal office or place of business and is either:- (i) sent by registered post, or (ii) delivered at the registered office or at the principal office or place of business of the company; (b) where the person to be served is a partnership, if the document is addressed to the partnership at its principal place of business, identifying it by the name or style under which its business is carried on, and is either:- (i) sent by registered post, or (ii) delivered at the said place of business; (c) where the person to be served is a public body or a corporation or society or other body, if the document is addressed to the secretary, treasurer or other head officer of that body, corporation or society at its principal office, and is either:- (i) sent by registered post, or (ii) delivered at that office; (d) in any other case, if the document is addressed to the person to be served and-- (i) is given or tendered to him, or (ii) if such person, cannot be found, is affixed on some conspicuous part of his last known place of residence or business, if within the 1 [National Capital Territory] of Delhi or is given or tendered to some adult member of his family or is affixed on some conspicuous part of the land or building to which it relates, or (iii) is sent by registered post to that person. (2) Any document which is required or authorised to be served on the owner or occupier of any land or building may be addressed "the owner" or "the occupier", as the case may be, of that land or building (naming that land or building,) without further name or description, and shall be deemed to be duly served-- (a) if the document so addressed is sent or delivered in accordance with clause (d) of sub-section (1); or (b) if the document so addressed or a copy thereof so addressed, is delivered to some person on the land or building or, where there is no person on the land or building to whom it can be delivered, is affixed to some conspicuous part of the land or building. (3) Where a document is served on a partnership in accordance with this section, the document shall be deemed to be served on each partner. (4) For the purpose of enabling any document to be served on the owner of any property the secretary to the Authority may by notice in writing require the occupier (if any) of the property to state the name and address of the owner thereof. (5) Where the person on whom a document is (o be served is a minor, the service upon his guardian or any adult member of his family shall be deemed to be service upon the minor. (6) A servant is not a member of the family within the meaning of this section. Substituted for "Union territory of Delhi" by the Delhi Development (Amdt) Act, 1996 with effect from . 1-12-1996.
Delhi Development Act, 1957_Section 44--> Every public notice given under this Act shall be in writing over the signature of the secretary to the Authority and shall be widely made known in the locality to be affected thereby by affixing copies thereof in conspicuous public places within the said locality, or by publishing the same by beat of drum or by advertisement in local newspaper or by any two or more of these means, and by any other means that the secretary may think fit.
Delhi Development Act, 1957_Section 45--> Where any notice, order or other document issued or made under this Act or any rule or regulation made thereunder requires anything to be done for the doing of which no time is fixed in this Act or the rule or regulation, the notice, order or other document shall specify a reasonable time for doing the same.
Delhi Development Act, 1957_Section 46--> All permissions, orders, decisions, notices and other documents of the Authority shall be authenticated by the signature of the secretary to the Authority or any other officer authorised by the Authority in this behalf.
Delhi Development Act, 1957_Section 47--> Every member and every officer and other employee of the Authority shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 45 of 1860.
Delhi Development Act, 1957_Section 48--> No court inferior to that of a 1 [Metropolitan Magistrate] shall try an offence punishable under this Act. Substituted by Act 38 of 1984, Section 8, for "magistrate of the first class" (w.e.f. 15-3-1985).
Delhi Development Act, 1957_Section 49--> [(1)] No prosecution for any offence punishable under this Act [other than an offence referred to in sub-section (2) shall be instituted except with the previous sanction of the Authority or as the case may be, the local authority concerned or any officer authorised by the Authority or such local authority in this behalf. 2 [(2) No prosecution for any offence for failure to comply with the order of the officer referred to in sub-section (3) of section 31 and punishable under sub-section (5) of that section shall be instituted except, with the previous sanction of the 3 [Lieutenant Governor] or any officer authorised by him in this behalf.] Section 49 re-numbered as sub-section (1) by Act 56 of 1963, Section 23. Section 49 re-numbered as sub-section (1) by Act 56 of 1963, Section 23. Substituted for "Administrator" by the Delhi Development (Amdt) Act, 1996 with effect from . 21-12-1996.
Delhi Development Act, 1957_Section 50--> Notwithstanding anything contained in 1 [section 29 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, 2 of 1974 it shall be lawful for any court of a Metropolitan Magistrate] to pass any sentence authorised by this Act in excess of its powers under the said section. Substituted by Act 38 of 1984, Section 9, for certain words (w.e.f. 15-3-1985).
Delhi Development Act, 1957_Section 51--> No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against any person for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act or any rule or regulation made thereunder.
Delhi Development Act, 1957_Section 52--> [(1)]The Authority may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that any power exercisable by it under this Act except the power to make regulations may also be exercised by such officer or local authority [or committee constituted under section 5A] as may be mentioned therein, in such cases and subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified therein. 2 [(2) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that any power exercisable by it under this Act, except the power to make rules, may also be exercised by such officer as may be mentioned therein, in such cases and subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified therein. (3) The 3 [Lieutenant Governor] of the 4 [National Capital Territory] of Delhi may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that any power exercisable by him under this Ac1 5 [except the power to hear appeals] may also be exercised by such officer as may be mentioned therein, in such cases and subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified therein.] Section 52 re-numbered as sub-section (1) by Act 56 of 1963., Section 24. Inserted. by Act 56 of 1963, Section 24. Substituted for "Administrator" by the Delhi Development (Amdt) Act, 1996 with effect from . 21-12-1996. Substituted for "Union territory of Delhi" by the Delhi Development (Amdt) Act, 1996 with effect from . 1-12-1996. Inserted by Act 38 of 1984, Section 10 (date to be notified).
Delhi Development Act, 1957_Section 53--> (1) Nothing in this Act shall affect the operation of the Slum Areas (Improvement and Clearance) Act, 1956 . (2) 1 [Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (4) of section 30 or sub-section (8) of section 31 or sub-section (1) of this section], the provisions of this Act and the rules and regulations made thereunder shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law. (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any such other law-- (a) when permission for development in respect of any land has been obtained under this Act such development shall not be deemed to be unlawfully undertaken or carried out by reason only of the fact that permission, approval or sanction required under such other law for such development has not been obtained; (b) when permission for such development has not been obtained under this Act, such development shall not be deemed to be lawfully under-taken or carried out by reason only of the fact that permission, approval or sanction required under such other law for such development has been obtained. Substituted by Act 56 of 1963, Section 25.
Delhi Development Act, 1957_Section 53A--> (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, no rule, regulation or bye-law shall be made or amended by a local authority in respect of matters specified in sub-section (2) unless the Authority, upon consideration of such rule, regulation or bye-law, certifies that it does not contravene any of the provisions of the master plan or the zonal development plan. (2) The matters referred to in sub-section (1) are the following, namely:- (a) water supply, drainage and sewage disposal; (b) erection and re-erection of buildings, including grant of building permissions, licences and imposition of restrictions on use and sub-division of buildings; (c) sub-division of land into building sites, roads and lanes, recreational sites and sites for community facilities; and (d) development of land, improvement schemes, and housing and rehousing schemes. 53B. Notice to be given of suits. (1) No suit shall be instituted against the Authority, or any member thereof, or any of its officers or other employees, or any person acting under the directions of the Authority or any member or any officer or other employee of the Authority in respect of any act done or purporting to have been done in pursuance of this Act or any rule or regulation made thereunder until the expiration of two months after notice in writing has been, in the case of the Authority, left at its office, and in any other case, delivered to, or left at the office or place of abode of, the person to be sued and unless such notice states explicitly the cause of action, the nature of relief sought, the amount of compensation claimed and the name and place of residence of the intending plaintiff and unless the plaint contains a statement that such notice has been so left or delivered. (2) No suit such as is described in sub-section (1) shall, unless it is a suit for recovery of immovable property or for a declaration of title thereto, be instituted after the expiry of six months from the date on which the cause of action arises. (3) Nothing contained in sub-section (7) shall be deemed to apply to a suit in which the only relief claimed is an injunction of which the object would be defeated by the giving of the notice or the postponement of the institution of the suit.] Inserted by Section 26, Act 56 of 1963, Section 25.
Delhi Development Act, 1957_Section 54--> Nothing in this Act shall apply to- (a) the carrying out of works for the maintenance, improvement or other alteration of any building, being works which affect only the interior of the building or which do not materially affect the external appearance of the building; (b) the carrying out by any local authority or by any department of Government of any works for the purpose of inspecting, repairing or renewing any drains, sewers, mains, pipes, cables or other apparatus including the breaking open of any street or other land for that purpose; (c) the erection of a building, not being a dwelling house if such building is required for the purposes subservient to agriculture; (d) the erection of a place of worship or a tomb or cenotaph or of a wall enclosing a graveyard, place of worship, cenotaph or samadhi on land which at the commencement of this Act is occupied by or for the purpose of such worship, tomb, cenotaph, graveyard or samadhi, (e) the excavations (including wells) made in the ordinary course of agricultural operations; and (f) the construction of unmetalled road intended to give access to land solely for agricultural purposes.
Delhi Development Act, 1957_Section 55--> (1) Where any land situated in any area in Delhi is required by the master plan or a zonal development plan to be kept as an open space or unbuilt upon or is designated in any such plan as subject to compulsory acquisition, then, if at the expiration of ten years from the date of operation of the plan under section 11 or where such land has been so required or designated by any amendment of such plan, from the date of operation of such amendment, the land is not compulsorily acquired 1 [...]the owner of the land may 2 [serve on the Central Government a notice] requiring his interest in the land to be so acquired. (2) 3 [If the Central Government] fails to acquire the land within a period of six months from the date of receipt of the notice, the master plan or, as the case may be, the zonal development plan shall have effect, after the expiration of the said six months as if the land were not required to be kept as an open space or unbuilt upon or were not designated as subject to compulsory acquisition. Certain words omitted by Act 56 of 1963, Section 27 (retrospectively). Substituted by Section 27, Act 56 of 1963, for "serve on the authority a notice". Substituted by Section 27, Act 56 of 1963, for "serve on the authority a notice".
Delhi Development Act, 1957_Section 56--> (1) The Central Government, after consultation with the Authority, may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act: Provided that consultation with the Authority shall not be necessary on the first occasion of the making of rules under this section, but the Central Government shall take into consideration any suggestions which the Authority may make in relation to the amendment of such rules after they are made. (2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:-- (a) the manner of election of representatives of the Municipal Corporation of Delhi under clause (c) of sub-section (3) of section 3; (b) the qualifications and disqualifications for being chosen as, and for being, members of the Authority or the Advisory Council; (c) the salaries, allowances and conditions of service of the whole-time paid members of the Authority; 1 [(cc) travelling and other allowances of the members of the Advisory Council except those of the ex officio member and such other members as are Government servants;] (d) the control and restrictions in relation to appointment of officers and other employees; 2 [(dd) the stages by which the development of any particular features of a zone may be carried out;] (e) the form and content of the master plan and a zonal development plan and the procedure to be followed in connection with the preparation, submission and approval of such plans and the form, and the manner of publication, of the notice relating to any such plan in draft; (f) the local inquiries and other hearings that may be held before a plan is approved; 3 [(g) the form and manner in which notice under sub-section (3) of section 11A shall be published;] (h) the fee to be paid on an application for permission under sub-section (7) of section 13 and the factors and circumstances to be taken into consideration in determining such fee; 4 [...] (j) the manner in which nazul lands shall be dealt with after development; 5 [(jj) the procedure to be observed by the 6 [Lieutenant Governor] under section 30 or section 31; (jjj) the factors to be taken into consideration in determining the rate of betterment charge in respect of property situate in any area outside the development area;] 7 [(ja) the manner in which the seating of any development under sub-section (1) of section 31A shall be made; (jb) the form in which an appeal shall be made to the Appellate Tribunal under sub-section (5) of section 31C and the fees that shall accompany such appeal;] (k) the procedure for referring any matter to the Central Government under section 36 for settlement of terms and conditions subject to which a local authority may be required to assume responsibility for amenities in any area; (l). the procedure to be followed by arbitrators in the determination of betterment charge; (m) the sum of money that may be kept in current account; 8 [(mm) the procedure to be followed for borrowing moneys by way of loans or debentures and their repayment;] (n) the form of the budget of the Authority and the manner of preparing the same; (o) the form of the balance-sheet and statement of accounts; (p) the form of the annual report and the date on or before which it shall be submitted to the Central Government; (q) the manner of constitution of the pension and provident funds for wnole-time paid members and officers and other employees of the Authority and the conditions subject to which such funds may be constituted; (r) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed by rules. Inserted by Act 4 of 1976, Section 2. Inserted. by Act 56 of 1963, Section 28. Inserted by Section 6, Act 38 of 1984, 8. 5 (w.e.f, 12-3-1985). Substituted by Act 56 of 1963, Section 28. for Clause (g). Inserted by Act 38 of 1984, Section 7 (w.e.f. 15-3-1985). Substituted for "Administrator" by the Delhi Development (Amdt) Act, 1996 with effect from . 21-12-1996. Clause (i) omitted by Act 56 of 1963, Section 28. (retrospectively). Inserted by Act 56 of 1963, Section 28.
Delhi Development Act, 1957_Section 57--> (1) 1 [The Authority, with the previous approval of the Central Government, may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations] consistent with this Act and the rules made thereunder, to carry out the purposes of this Act, and without prejudice to the generality of this power, such regulations may provide for-- (a) the summoning and holding of meetings of the Authority, the time and place where such meetings are to be held, the conduct of business at such meetings and the number of members necessary to form a quorum thereat; 2 [(aa) the summoning and holding of meetings of a committee constituted under section 5A, the tune and place where such meetings are to be held, the conduct of business at such meetings, and the number of members necessary to form a quorum thereat and the fees and allowances payable to the members for attending the meetings or any other work of the Authority;] (b) the powers and duties of the secretary and chief accounts officer of the Authority; (c) the salaries, allowances and conditions of service of the secretary, chief accounts officer and other officers and employees; (d) the procedure for the carrying out of the functions of the Authority under Chapter III; (e) the form in which any application for permission under sub-section (1) of section 13 shall be made and the particulars to be furnished in such application; (f) the terms and conditions subject to which user of lands and buildings in contravention of plans may be continued; 3 [...] (h) the manner of communicating the grounds of refusal of permission for development; (i) the form of the register of applications for permission and the particulars to be contained in such register; (j) the management of the properties of the Authority; (k) the time and manner of payment of betterment charge; and (l) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed by regulations. (2) Until the Authority is established under this Act, any regulation which may be made under sub-section (7) may be made by the Central Government; and any regulation so made may be altered or rescinded by the Authority in exercise of its powers under sub-section (1). Inserted by Act 38 of 1984, Section 11 (date to be notified). Inserted by Act 56 of 1963, Section 28. Substituted by Act 4 of 1976, Section 3, for "The Authority may, with the previous approval of the Central Government, make regulations".
Delhi Development Act, 1957_Section 58--> Every rule and every regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after such rule or regulation is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation, or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall, thereafter, have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or regulation.] Inserted by Act 56 of 1963, Section 29.
Delhi Development Act, 1957_Section 59--> (1) Where the Central Government is satisfied that the purposes for which the Authority was established under this Act have been substantially achieved so as to render the continued existence of the Authority in the opinion of the Central Government unnecessary, that Government may by notification in the Official Gazette declare that the Authority shall be dissolved with effect from such date as may be specified in the notification; and the Authority shall be deemed to be dissolved accordingly. (2) From the said date:- (a) all properties, funds and dues which are vested in, or realisable by, the Authority shall vest in, or be realisable by, the Central Government; (b) all nazul lands placed at the disposal of the Authority shall revert to the Central Government; (c) all liabilities which are enforceable against the Authority shall be enforceable against the Central Government; and (d) for the purpose of carrying out any development which has not been fully carried out by the Authority and for the purpose of realising properties, funds and dues referred to in clause (a), the functions of the Authority shall be discharged by the Central Government.
Delhi Development Act, 1957_Section 60--> (1) As from the date of the constitution of the Authority,:- (a) the United Provinces Town Improvement Act, 1919, shall cease to have effect in the1 [National Capital Territory] of Delhi; and (b) the Delhi (Control of Building Operations) Act, 1955, shall stand repealed. (2) Notwithstanding the provisions of sub-section (1):- (a) every officer and other employee serving under the Delhi Improvement Trust or the Delhi Development (Provisional) Authority immediately before the date of the constitution of the Authority shall, on and from such date, be transferred to and become an officer or other employee of the Authority with such designations as the Authority may determine and shall hold office by the same tenure, at the same remuneration and on the same terms and conditions of service as he would have held the same if the Authority had not been constituted, and shall continue to do so unless and until such tenure, remuneration and terms and conditions are duly altered by the Authority: Provided that any service rendered by any such officer or other employee before the constitution of the Authority shall be deemed to be service rendered under it: Provided further that the Authority may employ any such officer or other employee in the discharge of such functions under this Act as it may think proper and every such officer or other employee shall discharge those functions accordingly; (b) anything done or any action taken (including any appointment, delegation, notification, order, scheme, permission, rule, bye-law, regulation or form made, granted or issued) under any of the aforesaid Acts, shall, so far as it is not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, continue in force and be deemed to have been done or taken under the provisions of this Act unless and until it is superseded by anything done or any action taken under the said provisions; (c) all debts, obligations and liabilities incurred, all contracts entered into and all matters and things engaged to be done by, with or for the Delhi Improvement Trust or the Delhi Development (Provisional) Authority shall be deemed to have been incurred, entered into or engaged to be done by, with or for the Authority; (d) all properties movable and immovable vested in the Delhi Improvement Trust or the Delhi Development (Provisional) Authority shall vest in the Authority; (e) all rents, fees and other sums of money due to the Delhi Improvement Trust or the Delhi Development (Provisional) Authority shall be deemed to be due to the Authority; (f) all suits, prosecutions and other legal proceedings instituted or which might have been instituted by, for or against the Delhi Improvement Trust or the Delhi Development (Provisional) Authority may be continued or instituted by, for or against the Authority. Substituted for "Union territory of Delhi" by the Delhi Development (Amdt) Act, 1996 with effect from . 21-12-1996. 
