Delivery of Books (Public Libraries) Act, 1954_Section Preamble--> An Act provide for delivery of books to the National Library and other public libraries. BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:--
Delivery of Books (Public Libraries) Act, 1954_Section 1--> (1) This Act may be called the Delivery of Books(Public Libraries) Act, 1954. (2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
Delivery of Books (Public Libraries) Act, 1954_Section 2--> In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:-- (a) "book " includes every volume , part or division of a volume and pamphlet, in any language, and every sheet of music map, chart or plan separately printed or lithographed, but does not include a newspaper published in conformity with the provisions of Section 5 of the Press and Registration of Books Act, 1867 (XXV of 1867): (b) "public libraries" means the National Library at Calcutta and any three other libraries which may be specified by the Central Government in this behalf of notification in the Official Gazette.
Delivery of Books (Public Libraries) Act, 1954_Section 3--> (1) Subject to any rules that may be made under this Act, but without prejudice to the provisions contained in Section 9 of the Press and Registration of Books Act, 1867 (XXV of 1867) , the publisher of every book published is the territories to which this Act extends after the commencement of this act, shall, notwithstanding any agreement to the contrary, deliver at his own expense a copy of the book to the National Library at Calcutta and one such copy to each of the other three public libraries within thirty days from the date of its publication. (2) The copy delivered to the National Library shall be a copy of the whole book with all maps and illustrations belonging thereto finished and coloured in the same manner as the best copies of the same, and shall be bound, sewed or stitched together and on the best paper on which any copy of the book is printed. (3) The copy delivered to any other public library shall be on the paper on which the largest number of copies of the books is printed for sale, and shall be in the like condition as the book prepared for sale. (4) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall apply to any second or subsequent edition of a book in which edition no additions or alterations either in the letter -press or in the maps, book prints or other engravings belongings to the book have been made , and a copy of the first or some preceding edition of which book has been delivered under this Act.
Delivery of Books (Public Libraries) Act, 1954_Section 4--> The person in charge of a public library (whether called a librarian or by any other name) or any other person authorised by him in this behalf to whom a copy of a book is delivered under Section 3 shall give to the publisher a receipt in writing therefor.
Delivery of Books (Public Libraries) Act, 1954_Section 5--> Any publisher who contravenes any provision of this Act or of any rule made thereunder shall be punishable with fine which may extend to fifty rupees and the value of the book, and the court trying the offence may direct that the whole or any part of the fine realised from him shall be paid, by way of compensation , to the public library to which the book ought to have been delivered.
Delivery of Books (Public Libraries) Act, 1954_Section 6--> (1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under this Act save on complaint made by an officer empowered in this behalf by the Central Government by a General or special order. (2) No court inferior to that of a presidency magistrate or a magistrate of the first class shall try any offence punishable under this Act.
Delivery of Books (Public Libraries) Act, 1954_Section 7--> This Act shall also apply to books published by or under the authority of the Government other than books meant for official use only.
Delivery of Books (Public Libraries) Act, 1954_Section 8--> The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, makes rules to carry out the purposes of this Act. 
