Delivery of Book and Newspapers (Public Libraries) Act, 1954_Section Preamble--> An Act to provide for delivery of books to the National Library and other public libraries.
Delivery of Book and Newspapers (Public Libraries) Act, 1954_Section 1--> (1) This Act may be called the Delivery of Books and Newspaper (Public Libraries) Act, 1954. (2)It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
Delivery of Book and Newspapers (Public Libraries) Act, 1954_Section 2--> In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires; "book" includes every volume, part or division of a volume, and pamphlet, in any language and very sheet of music, map, chart or plan separately printed or lithographed, but does not include a newspaper published in conformity with the provision of section 5 of the Press and Registration of Books Act, 1867
Delivery of Book and Newspapers (Public Libraries) Act, 1954_Section 3--> (1) Subject to any rules that may be made under this Act, but without prejudice to the provisions contained in section 9 of the Press and Registration of Books Act 1867 (XXX of 1867), the publisher of every book published in the territories to which this Act extends after the commencement of this Act shall, notwithstanding any agreement to the contrary, deliver at his own expense a copy to each of the other three public libraries within thirty days from the date of its publication. (2) The copy delivered to the National Library shall be a copy of the whole book with all maps and illustration belonging thereto finished and colored in the same manner as the best copies of the same, and shall be bound, sewed or stitched together, and on the best paper on which any copy of the book is printed. (3) The copy delivered to any other public library shall be on the paper on which the largest number of copies of the book is printed for sale, and shall be in the like condition as the books prepared for sale, (4) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall apply to any second or subsequent edition of a book in which edition no additions or alterations either in the letter-press or in the maps, book prints or other engraving belonging to the book have been made, and a copy of the first or some preceding edition of which book has been delivered under this Act.(4) The person in charge of a public library (whether called a librarian or by any other name) or any other person authorized by him in by him in this behalf to whom a copy of a book is delivered under section 3 shall give to the publisher a receipt in writing therefor. (5). Any publisher who contravenes any provisions of this Act or of any rule made hereunder shall be punishable with fine which may extend to fifty rupees and if the contravention is in respect of a book, shall also be punishable with fine which shall be equivalent to the book, and the Court trying the offence may direct that the whole or any part of the fine realized from him shall be paid, by way of compensation, to the public library to which the book or newspaper, as the case may be, ought to have been delivered. (6). (1) No Court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under this Act save on complaint made by an officer empowered in this behalf by the Central Government by a general or special order. (2) No Court inferior to that of a Presidency Magistrate or a Magistrate of the first class shall try any offence punishable under this Act. 7.This Act shall also apply to books and newspaper published by or under the authority of the Government but shall not apply to books meant for official use only. 8.The Central Government may be notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act. 
