Orissa Municipal Councils (Postponement of Elections) Act, 1983_Section Preamble--> State(s): Orissa An Act To Provide For The Postponement Of Elections To Certain Municipal Councils of The State BE it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Orissa in the Thirty-fourth Year of the Republic of India, as follows:-
Orissa Municipal Councils (Postponement of Elections) Act, 1983_Section 1--> State(s): Orissa (1) This Act may be called the Orissa Municipal Councils (Postponement of Elections) Act, 1983. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from the 30th day of May, 1983.
Orissa Municipal Councils (Postponement of Elections) Act, 1983_Section 2--> State(s): Orissa In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires;- (a) "Municipal Act" means the Orissa Municipal Act, 1950; (b) "Municipal Council" means a Municipal Council constituted under the Municipal Act and shall include a Notified Area Council constituted thereunder; (c) Words and expressions used in this Act shall have the same meaning as assigned to them respectively, under-the Municipal Act.
Orissa Municipal Councils (Postponement of Elections) Act, 1983_Section 3--> State(s): Orissa Notwithstanding anything contained in the Orissa Municipal Councils (Postponement of Elections) Act, 1981 or the Orissa Municipal Councils (Postponement of Elections) (No-2) Act, 1981. or the Municipal Act or in any rules or orders made or issued thereunder:- (a) all proceedings or actions taken in furtherance of holding general elections for the reconstitution the Municipal Councils specified in the Schedule are hereby cancelled; and (b) the general elections for the reconstitution of the said Municipal Councils shall be held in accordance with the provisions of .the Municipal Act and the rules made thereunder on such date, not being later than the 31st March 1984 as maybe fixed by the state Government and the election so held shall, tor all purposes, be deemed to be a general election held under that Act;
Orissa Municipal Councils (Postponement of Elections) Act, 1983_Section 4--> State(s): Orissa (1) The Orissa Municipal 'Councils (Postponement' of Elections) Act. 1981. the Orissa Municipal Councils (Postponement of Elections) (No, 2) Act, 1981 and the Orissa Municipal Councils (Postponement of Elections) Ordinance. 11983 are hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal of the said Ordinance anything done or any action taken thereunder shall be deemed to have been done or taken under this Act.
Orissa Municipal Councils (Postponement of Elections) Act, 1983_Section Sch.1--> State(s): Orissa 1. Chikiti Notified Area Council 2. Pipili Notified Area Council 3. Udala Notified Area Council 4. Purusottampur Notified Area Council 5. Banpur Notified Area Council 6. Jagatsinghpur Notified Area Council 7. Buguda Notified Area Council 8. Kendrapada Municipal Council 9. Jharsuguda Municipal Council : 10. Tarava Notified Area Council 11. Bhiiban Notified Area Council 12. Nimapara Notified Area Council 13. Hirakud Notified Area Council 14. Deogarh Municipal Council 15. Bhubaneswar Municipal Council 16. Sambalpur Municipal Council 17. Karanjia Notified Area Council 18. Junagarh Notified Area Council 19. Digapahandi Notified Area Council 20. Basudevpur Notified Area Council 21. Bellaguntha Notified Area Council 22. Talcher Municipal Council 23. Padmapur Notified Area Council 
