Orissa Municipal Councils (Postponement or Elections) (No. 2) Act, 1983_Section Preamble--> State(s): Orissa An Act to provide for the Postponement of elections to certain municipal councils of the state. BE it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Orissa in the Thirty-fourth Year of the Republic of India, as follows:-
Orissa Municipal Councils (Postponement or Elections) (No. 2) Act, 1983_Section 1--> State(s): Orissa (1) This Act may be called the Orissa Municipal Councils (Postponement or Elections) (No. 2) Act, 1983. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from the 30th day of May, 1983.
Orissa Municipal Councils (Postponement or Elections) (No. 2) Act, 1983_Section 2--> State(s): Orissa In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires - (a) "Municipal Act" means the Orissa Municipal Act, 1950; (b) "Municipal Council" means a Municipal Council constituted under the Municipal Act and shall include a Notified Area Council constituted thereunder ; (c) words and expressions used in this Act shall have the same meaning as assigned to them respectively, under the Municipal Act.
Orissa Municipal Councils (Postponement or Elections) (No. 2) Act, 1983_Section 3--> State(s): Orissa Notwithstanding anything contained in the Municipal Act, the general elections for the reconstitution of the Municipal Councils specified in the Schedule shall be held in accordance with the provisions of the Municipal Act and the rules made thereunder on such date, not being later than the 31 at March, 1984, as may be fixed by the State Government and the elections so held shall, for all purposes, be deemed to be general election held under this Act.
Orissa Municipal Councils (Postponement or Elections) (No. 2) Act, 1983_Section 4--> State(s): Orissa (1) The Orissa Municipal Councils (Postponement of Elections) (No. 2) Ordinance, 1983 is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under this Act.
Orissa Municipal Councils (Postponement or Elections) (No. 2) Act, 1983_Section Sch.1--> State(s): Orissa 1. Keoujhargarh Municipal Council 2. Angul Notified Area Council 3. Soro Notified Area Council 4. Khalikote Notified Area Council 
