Orissa Money-Lenders Act, 1939_Section Preamble--> State(s): Orissa An Act to regulate money-lending transactions and to grant relief to debtors in the State of Orissa Preamble.- WHEREAS it is expedient to regulate money-lending transactions and to grant relief to debtors in the State of Orissa. It is hereby enacted as follows:-
Orissa Money-Lenders Act, 1939_Section 1--> State(s): Orissa (1) This Act may be called the Orissa Money-Lenders Act, 1939. (2) It extends to the whole of the State of Orissa. (3) All or any of the provisions of this Act shall come into force throughout the whole or any part of the State on Such date or dates as the Governor may, by notification, appoint 1 different dates may be so appointed for different provisions and different areas. Sections 1, 2, 3, 9 to 17, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26 and 27 apply to all the partially-excluded areas in the Province of Orissa with effect from the 15th April 1940 subject to certain modifications (No. 1120-IVA-1-40-D., dated the 6th April 1940).
Orissa Money-Lenders Act, 1939_Section 2--> State(s): Orissa In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context, - [(a) "Bank" means - (i) a banking company as defined in the Banking Regulation Act, 1949; (ii) the State Bank of India, constituted under the State Bank of India Act, 1955; (iii) a subsidiary bank as defined in the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959; (iv) a corresponding new bank constituted under the Banking Companies, ( Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970; (v) the Industrial Development Bank of India, constituted under the Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964; (vi) the Agricultural Refinance Corporation, constituted under the Agricultural Refinance Corporation Act, 1963; (vii) the Life Insurance Corporation of India, constituted under the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956; (viii) the Industrial Finance Corporation of India, constituted under the Industrial Finance Corporation Act, 1948; (ix) the Orissa State Financial Corporation, constituted under the State Financial Corporation Act, 1951; (x) any other banking or financial institution notified in this behalf by the State Government;]1 (b) "business of money-lending" means the business of advancing loans; (c) "capital" means that which a money-lender invests in the business of money-lending whether in money or in kind; [(d) "company" means a company registered under the Companies Act, 1956;] 2 [(e) "co-operative society" means. a society registered or deemed to have been registered under the Orissa Co-operative Societies Act, 1962 and includes a land development bank as defined in that Act;] 3 (f) "Court" includes a Court acting in the exercise of insolvency jurisdiction and also a Court or other authority to which a decree is sent for execution; [(f-1) "debtor" means a person to whom a loan is advanced and includes his successor-in-interest or surety;] 4 5 (g) "decree" means a decree as defined by the Code of Civil procedure, 1908 and includes 6 [decree passed by an Agency Court under the Agency Rules] an award enforceable as a decrees of a Court under the Indian Arbitration Act, 1899 and also preliminary decrees in the case of secured loans; 7 (g) "decree" means a decree as defined by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 and includes an award enforceable as a decree of a Court under the Indian Arbitration Act, 1899 and also preliminary decrees and final decrees in the case of secured loans; (h) "interest" means rate of interest and includes the return to be made over and above what was actually lent whether the same is charged or sought to be recovered pacifically by way of interest or otherwise; (i) "loan" means an advance whether of money or in kind on interest made by a money-lender and shall include a transaction on a document bearing interest executed in respect of a past liability and any transaction which, in substance, is a loan, but shall not include - (1) a loan advanced by the State Government or by any local body authorized by the State Government or by a Co-operative Society; (2) a deposit of money in a Post Office Savings Bank or a deposit of money or other property in any other bank or in a company or with a Co-operative Society; (3) the amount, or the proportionate amount, as the case may be, payable under a mortgage by the purchaser at a sale in execution of a decree of a Court or otherwise, of the whole or part of the properties subject to a mortgage, the purchase having been made prior to the coming into force of this Act; (4) any loan or loans due to a widow on the 1st February 1930, who on that date did not own any other property provided that the principal amount of the loan or loans does not exceed rupees two thousand. Explanations (1) A bond bearing interest executed in respect of goods taken on credit constitutes a loan. (2) A supply of goods- (i) on khata carrying interest up to six and a quarter per centum simple per annum, or (ii) on credit,is not a loan. (3) For the purposes of this clause a "purchaser" includes his legal representatives and successors-in-interest, whether by inheritance, assignment or otherwise. - (4) For the purposes of this clause, the house in which the creditor widow lived or any furniture therein or her household utensils, wearing apparel, jewellery or such like personal belongings shall not be regarded as property. [(j) "money-lender" means a person whose business is that of advancing loans but does not include a bank or a co-operative society and the expression "money-lending" shall be construed accordingly;] 8 (k) "Prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; (l) "principal" means in relation to a loan the amount actually lent to the debtor; (m) "registered money-lender" means a person to whom a registration certificate has been granted under section 5, and shall include a Hindu undivided family and the legal representatives and successors-in-interest, whether by inheritance, assignment or otherwise, of a registered money-lender; (n) "rules" means rules made under this Act; (o) "secured loan" means a loan for which the money-lender holds a mortgage, charge, lien, or pledge on the property of the debtor or any part thereof as a security for that loan; (p) "Sub-Registrar" means a Sub-Registrar appointed under the Indian Registration Act, 1908; (q) "suit" includes an appeal; 9 [(q-l) "Tahasildar" includes an Additional Tahasildar ;] 10 (r) "unsecured loan" means any loan other than a secured loan. Substituted by the Orissa Money-Lenders (Amendment) Act, 1975 (Orissa Act 54 of 175),s. 2 (i). Substituted by ibid., s. 2 (ii) Substituted by ibid., s. 2 (iii) Inserted by ibid., s. 2 (iv) This clause is in force in this form in the partially-excluded areas of the Province, see the Orissa Laws Validating Regulation, 1942 (Or. Reg. I of 1943), s. 2 and Second Schedule Inserted by the Orissa Laws Validating Regulation, 1942 (Or.Reg.I of 1943), s.2 and second Schedule This clause is in force in this form in the areas other than the partially-excluded areas of the Province, see ibid. The difference between the two clauses lies in the words printed in italics. Substituted by the Orissa Money-Lenders (Amendment) Act, 1975 (Orissa Act 54 of 175),s. 2(v). Omitted by the Orissa Money-Lenders (Amendment) Act, 1976 (Orissa Act 32 of 1976) s. 2(a). Inserted by ibid., s. 2(b).
Orissa Money-Lenders Act, 1939_Section 3--> State(s): Orissa The State Government may, by notification 1 2 for any special reason or reasons to be stated in such notification, exempt any money-lender or class of money-lenders or any class of loans in the whole or any part of the State of Orissa from the operation of all or any of the provisions of this Act. See Notification No. 7284-VI-J-3/52-Judl., dated the 27th October 1952 in the Orissa Gazette, Part III, Page 22. See Notification No. 4242-IIJ-137/58-Judl., dated the 9th July 1959 in the Orissa Gazette, Extraordinary, dated the 11th July 1959.
Orissa Money-Lenders Act, 1939_Section 4--> State(s): Orissa No person shall carry on the business of money-lending after the 22nd day of November, 1975 unless he is registered as a money-lender under this Act.
Orissa Money-Lenders Act, 1939_Section 4A--> State(s): Orissa Every Sub-Registrar shall maintain a register of money-lenders in such form and containing such particulars as may be prescribed. Such register shall be deemed to be a public document within the meaning of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872.] 1 Substituted by the Orissa Money-Lenders (Amendment) Act, 1975 (Orissa Act 54 of 1975), s. 3.
Orissa Money-Lenders Act, 1939_Section 5--> State(s): Orissa Any person may make an application to be registered as a money-lender. Every such application shall be in writing and shall state: the name and address of the applicant; the name and style under which he carried on or desires to carry on business as a money-lender; the principal place of his business and the branches thereof, if any; whether any certificate of registration previously granted to him under this Act has been cancelled ; and such other particulars as may be prescribed. Every application made under sub-section (I) shall be accompanied by the prescribed registration fee and shall be presented to the Sub-Registrar within whose jurisdiction the principal place of business referred to in clause (c) of sub- section (1) is situate. Any such application, which is not accompanied by the prescribed registration fee or does not contain the particulars specified in sub-section (1), shall be summarily rejected. The State Government may by rules prescribe for different classes of money-lenders and for different areas a registration fee [xxxxx]1 to be paid by an applicant for registration; Provided that the State Government may, by notification, exempt any person or class of persons from the payment of the registration fee either generally or in any specified area. On receipt of an application under clause (0) of sub-section (2) the Sub-Registrar shall, except where a certificate previously granted to the applicant has been cancelled under this Act and the order of cancellation is in force or as the case may be, the period for which the applicant has been disqualified to be registered as a money-lender has not expired, grant a registration certificate in the prescribed form to the applicant. ]2 Substituted by the Orissa Money-Lenders (Amendment) Act, 1975 (Orissa Act 54 of 1975), s. 3. Substituted by the Orissa Money-Lenders (Amendment) Act, 1975 (Orissa Act 54 or 1975), s. 4.
Orissa Money-Lenders Act, 1939_Section 6--> State(s): Orissa (1) A registration certificate granted under section 5 shall, unless sooner cancelled, remain in force for five years from the date on which it is granted and may be renewed from time to time for a period of five years at a time. (2) The provisions contained in section 5 shall apply in relation to the renewal of a registration certificate, as they apply in relation to the grant of a registration certificate. ] 1 Substituted by ibid., s. 5.
Orissa Money-Lenders Act, 1939_Section 7--> State(s): Orissa Every registered money-lender shall in respect of every loan advanced by him after the commencement of this Act and every transaction made by him after the commencement of this Act relating to any loan advanced by him before the commencement of this Act- (a) " regularly record and maintain, or cause to be recorded and maintained" an account showing for each debtor- (i) the date of the loan, the amount of the principal of the loan and the rate per centum per annum of interest charged on the loan; (ii) the amount of every payment received by the money-lender in respect of the loan, and the date of such payment; and (iii) any other terms which may be agreed on between the money lender and the debtor; (b) give to the debtor, or his agent, a receipt for every sum paid by, or on behalf of, the debtor duly signed and, if necessary, stamped at the time of such payment; or, within a reasonable time after it. The money-lender shall also, on demand, permit the debtor or his agent to endorse such payment on the document, if any, evidencing the loan; and (c) give to the debtor a signed receipt for every pawned article with its general description, immediately after it is pawned, mentioning the amount for which it is pawned, the rate of interest charged per centum per annum and other particulars as may be prescribed.
Orissa Money-Lenders Act, 1939_Section 7-A--> State(s): Orissa No money-lender shall charge interest on any loan advanced by him at a rate exceeding- (a) nine percent per annum simple interest, where the loan is secured ;]and (b) twelve percent per annum simple interest, where the loan is not secured.
Orissa Money-Lenders Act, 1939_Section 7-B--> State(s): Orissa (1) Any Sub divisional Officer and any Tahasildar may, at any time, with such assistance as he thinks necessary, enter any premises within his jurisdiction in which any person carries on business as a money-lender and inspect the books, accounts, records, files, documents, safes, vaults and pledges in such premises. (2) The Sub divisional Officer or the Tahasildar shall have the authority to require any person whose testimony he may require regarding any loan or any money-lending business, to appear before him or to produce or cause to be produced any document and to examine such person on oath.]1 [(3) While making an inspection under sub-section (1), the inspecting officer may seize and take to his office for further investigation such books, accounts, records, files and documents as he considers necessary after giving to the person from whose custody they are seized, a receipt describing the books, accounts, records, files and documents so seized. (4) The inspecting officer shall, within seven days of the seizure and removal of the books, accounts, records, files and documents from the premises, return them to the person from whose custody they were removed, unless they are required to be made over to the police or to be produced in a Court.] 				secured. Inserted the by Orissa Money-Lenders (Amendment) Act, 1975 (Orissa Act 54 of 1975), s.6
Orissa Money-Lenders Act, 1939_Section 7-C--> State(s): Orissa 1 No money-lender shall recover towards the interest in respect of any loan advanced by him, an amount in excess of the amount of the principal. Inserted by the Orissa Money-Lenders (Amendment) Act, 1976 (Orissa Act 32 of 1976), s. 4
Orissa Money-Lenders Act, 1939_Section 7-D--> State(s): Orissa Any loan in respect of which the money-lender has realised from the debtor an amount equal to, or more than, twice the amount of the principal, shall stand discharged and the amount, if, any, so realised in excess of twice the amount of loan shall be refunded by the money-lender to the debtor.] 1 Inserted by the Orissa Money-Lenders (Amendment) Act, 1976 (Orissa Act 32 of 1976), s. 4
Orissa Money-Lenders Act, 1939_Section 8--> State(s): Orissa A money-lender shall not be entitled to institute a suit for the recovery of a loan advanced by him after the date on which this section comes into force: unless he was registered under this Act at the time when such loan was advanced: Provided that a money-lender shall be entitled to institute a suit to recover a loan advanced by him at any time in the course of [two years] 1 after the date on which this section comes into force, if he is granted a certificate of registration under section 5 at any time before the expiration of the [ said years ] 2 Substituted by the Orissa Money-Lenders (Amendment) Act, 1951 (Orissa Act XXIV of 1951, s. 2 for "a year". Substituted by ibid for "said year".
Orissa Money-Lenders Act, 1939_Section 9--> State(s): Orissa Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any other law or in anything having the force of law or in any contract, no Court shall, in any suit [whether brought by a money-lender or by any other person] 1 in respect of a loan advanced after the commencement of this Act, pass a decree for interest at rates exceeding 9 per centum simple per annum in the cases of a secured loan and 12 per centum simple per annum in the case of unsecured loan: [...] 2 Substituted by the Orissa Money-lenders (Amendment) Act, 1947 (Orissa Act XVIII 1947),s. 3 for "brought by a money-lender". Deleted by the Orissa Money-Lenders (Amendment) Act, 1975 (Orissa Act 54 of 1915), s. 7.
Orissa Money-Lenders Act, 1939_Section 10--> State(s): Orissa (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any other law or in anything having the force of law or in any contract, no Court shall, in any suit [whether brought by a money-lender or by any other person] 1 in respect of a loan advanced before or after the commencement of this Act, pass a decree for an amount of interest for the period preceding the institution of the suit which, together with any amount already realised as interest through Court or otherwise is greater than the amount of the loan originally advanced. (2) Where, in any suit, as is referred to in sub-section (1), it is found that the amount already realised as interest through Court or otherwise, for the period preceding the institution of the suit it greater that the amount of the loan originally advanced, so much of the said amount of interest as is in excess of the loan shall be appropriated toward the satisfaction of the loan and the Court shall pass a decree for the payment of the balance of the loan, if any. [(3) Where a decree passed by a Court on the 1st April 1936 or thereafter on the basis of a loan remains unsatisfied in whole or in part on the date 2 on which the Orissa Monev-Lenders (Amendment) Act, 1947, comes into force, the Court which passed the decree or the court or other authority' to which the decree is sent for execution shall, on the application of the judgment-debtor, exercise the powers specified in sub-section (2) and the decree shall be modified accordingly.] 3 Deleted by the Orissa Money-Lenders (Amendment) Act, 1975 (Orissa Act 54 of 1915), s. 7. This Act came into force on the IIth June 1947, see Orissa Gazette, Extraordinary of even date. Inserted by the Orissa Money-Lenders (Amendment) Act, 1947 (Or Act XVIII of 1947), s.4 (ii).
Orissa Money-Lenders Act, 1939_Section 11--> State(s): Orissa (1) In any suit [whether brought by a money-lender or by any other] 1 in respect of a loan advanced before the commencement of this Act, the Court shall exercise all or any of the following powers as may be applicable to it, namely:- 2 [(i) reopen the transaction, take an account between the parties and relieve the debtor of all liability in respect of any interest in excess of nine per centum simple per annum in the case of a secured loan other than a loan of grain twelve per centum simple per annum in the case of a unsecured loan other than a loan of grain and loan of grain and twenty-five per centum simple per annum in the case of a loan of grain; 3 [(i) reopen the transaction, take an account between the parties and relieve the debtor of all liabilities in respect of any interest in excess of nine per centum simple per annum in the case of a secured loan and twelve centum simple per annum in the case or an unsecured loan;] 4 [(ii) notwithstanding any agreement purporting to close previous dealings and to create a new obligation, reopen any account already taken between them and relieve the debtor of all liability in respect of any interest, in excess of nine per centum simple per annum in the case of a secured loan other than a loan of grain and twelve per centum simple per annum in the case of an unsecured loan other than a loan of grain and twenty-five five per centum simple per annum in the case of a loan of grain. ] 5 [(ii) Notwithstanding any agreement purporting to close previous dealings and to create a new obligation, reopen any account already taken between them and relieve the debtor or of all liability in respect of any interest, in excess of nine per centum simple per annum in the case of a secured loan and twelve per centum simple per annum in the case of an unsecured loan.] (iii) appropriate excess interest referred to in clauses (i) and (ii) realised through Court or otherwise towards the satisfaction of the loan; (iv) set aside either wholly or in part or revise or alter any security given or agreement made in respect of any loan, and, if the money-!ender has parted with the security order him to indemnify the debtor in such manner and to such extent as it may deem just: Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall be deemed to require the creditor to refund any sum which has been paid to him. (2) Where a decree passed by a Court on the 1st April, 1936 or thereafter, on the basis of a loan, remains unsatisfied in whole or in part on the date on which this Act comes into force the Court which passed the decree, or the Court or other authority to which a decree is sent for execution [shall] 6 on the application of the judgment-debtor: exercise all or any of the powers specified in sub-section (1). Substituted by the Orissa Money-Lenders Amendment) Act, 1947 (Or. Act XVIII of 1947), s .5 (i). This clause is in force in this form in the partially-excluded areas of the province, see the Orissa Laws Validating Regulation, 1942 (Or. Reg. I of 1943), s. 2 and Second Schedule. This clause is in force in this form in the areas other than the partially-excluded areas of the Province, see ibid. The difference between the two clauses lies in the words printed in italics. This clause is in force in this form in the partially-excluded areas of the province, see the Orissa Laws Validating Regulation, 1942 (Or. Reg. I of 1943), s. 2 and Second Schedule. This clause is in force in this form in the areas other than the partially-excluded areas of the Province, see ibid. The difference between the two clauses lies in the words printed in italics. Substituted by the Orissa Money-Lenders (Amendment) Act,1947 (Orissa Act XVlII of 1947),s.5 (ii)for"May".
Orissa Money-Lenders Act, 1939_Section 12--> State(s): Orissa Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any other law or in anything having the force of law or in any contract between the money-lender and the person to whom the loan was advanced, the Court may at the time of passing the decree in any suit relating to a mortgage by which any Joan is secured, order that payment of any amount decreed in such suit shall, subject to such conditions as the Court may, impose be made by instalments: Provided that before fixing the instalments the Court shall take into consideration the repaying capacity of the judgment-debtor and shall satisfy itself that the judgment- debtorn in a position to pay the instalments on the due dates: Provided further that simple interest at 6 per centum per annum may be allowed on the decretal amount till the date of payment or sale.
Orissa Money-Lenders Act, 1939_Section 13--> State(s): Orissa (I) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any other law or in anything having the force of law or in any contract between the money-lender and the person to whom the loan was advanced, the Court may [for reasons to be recorded in writing]1 at any time, on the application of a judgment-debtor, after notice to the decree-holder, direct that the amont of any decree passed before or after the commencement of this Act, in respect of a loan including any decree in a suit relating to a mortgage by which a loan is secured, shall be paid in such number of instalments and subject to such conditions on the dates fixed by it as having regard to the circumstances of the judgment-debtor and the amount of the decree, it considers fit. 2 [(2)Any person aggrieved by an order passed under sub-section (I) may appeal to the Court to which appeals from the Court executing the decree ordinarily lie.] Inserted by ibid. Inserted by ibid., s. 6 (2).
Orissa Money-Lenders Act, 1939_Section 14--> State(s): Orissa 1 (1) When an application is made for the execution of a decree passed in respect of a loan or the interest on a loan by the sale of the judgment-debtor's property, the Court executing the decree shall notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any other law or in anything having the force of law, hear the parties to the decree and estimate as prescribed the value of such property and of that portion of such property the proceeds of the sale of which it considers will be sufficient to satisfy the decree: Provided that the Court may order the whole property of the judgment-debtor to be sold if it is satisfied that by reason or the nature of such property or any other special circumstances such property cannot reasonably or conveniently be sold in part. 2 [(2) Any person aggrieved by an order passed under sub-section (I) may appeal to the Court to which appeals from the Court executing the decree ordinarily lie.] Section 14 re-numbered as sub-section (1) of the section by ibid., s. 7. Inserted by ibid.
Orissa Money-Lenders Act, 1939_Section 15--> State(s): Orissa (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any other law or in anything having the force of law, the proclamation of the intended sale of property in execution of a decree passed in respect of a loan or the interest on a loan shall include only so much of the property of the judgment-debtor, the proceeds of the sale of which the Court considers will be sufficient to satisfy the decree, and such property shall not be sold at a price lower than the price specified in the said proclamation: Provided that if the property to be sold is immovable property and the decree holder specifies which portion of such property should be sold, the Court shall order that such portion or so much of such portion as may seem necessary to satisfy the decree shall be sold: Provided further that if the highest amount bid for the property included in the sale proclamation is less than the price specified for such property in the proclamation the Court may sell the property for such highest amount, if the decree-holder consents in writing to forego so much of the amount decreed as is equal to the difference between the highest amount bid and the price specified for such property in the sale proclamation. [(2) any person aggrieved by an order passed under sub-section (1) may appeal to the Court to which appeals from the Court executing the decree ordinarily lie] 2 Section 15 re-numbered as sub-section (1) of the section by the Orissa Money-Lenders (Amendment Act, 1947 (Or. Act XVIII of 1947), S. 8. Inserted by the Orissa Money-Lenders (Amendment) Act, 1947 ( Orissa Act XVIII or 1947), s. 8
Orissa Money-Lenders Act, 1939_Section 16--> State(s): Orissa The provisions of sections 10 to 15 shall [so far as may be] 1 apply- (i) to suits [whether brought by money-lenders or by any other persons] 2 in respect of loans advanced before the commencement of this Act, and pending on the date on which the said sections come into force; and (ii) to appeals and proceedings in execution arising in respect of decrees passed on the 1st April 1936 or thereafter;: on the basis of loans whether such appeals of proceedings in execution were pending on, or instituted after, the date on which the said sections come into force. Inserted by ibid,s.9 (1) Substituted by ibid., S, 9 (2) for "brought by money-lenders"
Orissa Money-Lenders Act, 1939_Section 17--> State(s): Orissa (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any law or anything having the force of law or in any contract, any possessory mortgage which is executed either before or after the commencement of this Act shall, unless discharged previously. stands discharged after the expiration of a period of seven years from the date of the mortgage (2) On the discharge of the mortgage as aforesaid, the mortgage shall deliver to the mortgagor all documents in his possession or power relating to the mortgaged property and shall retransfer the property to the mortgagor and put him in possession thereof at his cost free from the mortgage and from all encumbrances created by him and those claiming under him within three months from the date of expiry of the aforesaid period of seven years: Provided that in cases where the said period of seven years has expired prior to the 22nd day of September 1975 the delivery of documents and the delivery of possession of the property as aforesaid shall be effected within three menthes from the said date. (3) In case of, the death of the mortgagor before the delivery of possession, the mortgagee shall deliver possession of the said documents and the mortgaged property to the successor-in-interest of the mortgagor. (4) Where the mortgagee is unable to ascertain or is in doubt as to who is the successor-in-interest; he shall make an application within the period allowed for delivery of possession, to the Court which is competent to entertain a suit in respect of the mortgaged property for taking over possession and management of the property and custody of the documents where upon the Court shall appoint a receiver and thereupon, the provisions contained in Order XL of the Code of the Civil Procedure, 1908 shall, so far as may be, apply. (5) Any person claiming to be the successor-in-interest of the mortgagor may apply to the Court within twelve years from the date of appointment of the receiver for possession of the property where upon the Court shall determine if the applicant or any other person is the successor in- interest and for the said purpose the court shall, as far as may be, follow the procedure provided in part X of the Indian Succession Act, 1925. (6) After such determination, the Court shall deliver possession of the property along with the documents and the amount, if any, which has accrued from the income of the property to the person who is found by the Court to be the successor-in-interest. (7) If no application is made under sub-section (5) within the period specified therein, or if on such an application being made no person is found to be the successor-in-interest and the said period has already elapsed, the property along with the amount, if any which has accrued from its income shall lapse to the State Government. Explanation: For the purpose of this section any mortgage in pursuance of which the mortgagee is in possession and enjoyment of the mortgage security in satisfaction of the mortgage debt either in whole or in part shall be deemed to be a possessory mortgage.] 1 . Substituted by ibid., S, 9 (2) for "brought by money-lenders"
Orissa Money-Lenders Act, 1939_Section 18--> State(s): Orissa (1) Where in any suit, brought in respect of a loan by a registered money-lender, or in respect of any security taken for a loan by a registered money-lender the Court is of opinion that the registered money-lender has been guilty of 'fraud, the Court shall make an order recording a finding to that effect and fixing a period not exceeding three years as it thinks fit during which the registration certificate granted to the money-lender shall remain cancelled. (2) Where an order under sub-section (1) is made by a Court exercising original jurisdiction an appeal shall lie from it, within such period as may be prescribed, to the Court to which appeals from the decrees passed by such Court ordinarily lie, and the decision of the appellate Court shall be final; but no appeal shall lie from an order made under sub-section (1) by an appellate Court in an appeal from a decree of a Court exercising original jurisdiction. (3) A copy of every order made under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) shall be sent to the Collector by the Court concerned and the Collector shall, after the order has become final, cancel the registration certificate granted to the money-lender for the period mentioned in the order. (4) When the certificate of a registered money-lender has been cancelled under sub-section (1) such money-lender shall not be entitled to make any application under section 5 during the period in which such order of cancellation remains in force, but such cancellation shall not preclude the money-lender from instituting suits in respect of loans advanced by him before the date of the order of such cancellation.
Orissa Money-Lenders Act, 1939_Section 18-A--> State(s): Orissa (1) If the Sub-divisional Officer or the Tahasildar is satisfied that any registered money-lender carrying on the business of money-lending within his jurisdiction has charged interest at a rate higher than the rate specified in section 7-A, he may pass an order for cancellation of the certificate of registration granted to the money-lender and may disqualify him from being registered as a money-lender for such period not exceeding three years, as may be specified in the order: Provided that no order cancelling the certificate of registration shall be passed without giving the money-lender a reasonable opportunity of being heard. (1) An order passed under sub-section (1) shall forthwith be communicated to the concerned money-lender by the authority who has passed the order. (2) Any person aggrieved by an order cancelling a certificate of registration may, within one month from the date of communication of the order prefer an appeal (a) if the order is passed by a Tahasildar, before the Sub-divisional Officer; and (b) if the order is passed by a Sub-divisional Officer before the Collector. (3) On receipt of an appeal under sub-section (3), the appellate authority may stay To be operation of the order appealed against. (4) The Collector may transfer all appeal preferred under sub-section (3) to any officer subordinate to him who is above the rank of a Sub-divisional Officer, for hearing and disposal. (5) All orders passed under sub-section (1), shall, subject to the order passed in appeal, if any, be final and shall not be called in question in any Court. (6) An order passed under sub-section (1) shall, if it is not set-aside in appeal, if any, be communicated by the authority passing the order to the Sub Registrar who, shall thereupon make necessary corrections in the control money- lenders maintained by him. (7) The cancellation of the certificate of registration of a money-lender shall not affect his right to realise the loans advanced by him in accordance with the provisions of this Act prior to such cancellation, but he shall not be entitled to the refund of any fee paid in respect of such certificate.
Orissa Money-Lenders Act, 1939_Section 18-B--> State(s): Orissa (1) The State Government may, from time to time, by notification, require the money-lenders or money-lenders belonging to any class or carrying on business in any local area, to produce before such authority and by such date as may be specified in the said notification, all records relating to their business including documents evidencing advance of loans. (2) The authority specified in the notification referred to in sub-section (I) shall scrutinise the documents with a view to determining if the transactions exceed the amount for which the money-lender has obtained the registration certificate and shall after giving the money-lender a reasonable opportunity of being heard, pass an order declaring the particulars of transactions that are within the amount specified in the said certificate. (3) The order referred to in sub-section (2) shall be published by affixture in the notice-board of the authority passing the order and copies thereof shall also be sent to the Block Development Officer and the Tahasildar within whose local limits of jurisdiction the money-lender's principal place of business is situate for publication by affixture in the notice-boards of their offices. (4) If the authority referred to in sub-section (2) is satisfied that a money-lender has transacted business in excess of the amount specified in his registration certificate, he may issue an order cancelling the said certificate and may also disqualify him from being registered as a money-lender for such period not exceeding three years as may be specified in the order. (5) An order made under sub-section (4) shall forthwith be communicated to the concerned money-lender by the authority who has made the order. (6) Any person aggrieved by an order passed under sub-section (2) or sub-section (4) may, within one month from the date of communication of the said order, prefer an appeal before such authority as may be specified in the notification referred to in sub-section (1). (7) An order passed under sub-section (2) or sub-section (4) shall, subject to the order passed in an appeal, if any, be final and shall not be called in question in any Court. (8) No Court shall entertain any claim in respect of any loan advanced prior to the date of the order referred to in sub-section (2) unless the particulars thereof are contained in the said order and all suits in respect of such claims shall stand abated. (9) An order passed under sub-section (4) shall, if it is not set aside in appeal, if any, be communicated by the authority passing the order to the concerned Sub- Registrar who shall thereupon make necessary corrections in the register of money-lenders maintained by him. (10) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (8), the cancellation of the certificate of registration of a money-lender shall not affect his right to realise the loans advanced by him in accordance with the provisions of' this Act prior to such cancellation, but he shall not be entitled to the refund of any fee paid in respect of such certificate. ] 1 Inserted by the Orissa Money-lenders (Amendment) Act, 1975 (Orissa Act 54 of 1975), s. 9.
Orissa Money-Lenders Act, 1939_Section 18-C--> State(s): Orissa Where any money-lender registered under this Act desires not to carry on the business of money-lending, he may make an application to the authority who granted him the certificate of registration for the cancellation of such registration, and the authority may, after making such enquiry as it deems fit, cancel the registration of the applicant.] 1 Inserted by the Orissa Money-Lending Laws (Amendment) Act, 1977 (Orissa Act 7 of 1977), s. 2 (a).
Orissa Money-Lenders Act, 1939_Section 19--> State(s): Orissa (1) Any money-lender who: (a) carries on business as such without being registered as a money-lender; or (b)receives interest at a rate higher than the rate specified in section 7-A; or (c) actually advances an amount less than the amount shown in his accounts, register, pawn-tickets or other documents relating to the loan, shall, on conviction, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees or with both.] 1 [(2) Any money-lender who, without sufficient cause,- (a) fails to put the mortgagor or his successor-in-interest, as the case may be in possession of the property as required by sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) of section 17; or] 2 [(aa) in the case of a possessory mortgage within the meaning of section 17 which is discharged prior to the completion of a period of seven years from the date of the mortgage, fails to put the mortgagor or his successor-in--interest, as the case may be, in possession of the mortgaged property within three months from the date of such discharge; or] 3 [(b) fails to make an application to the Court as required by sub-section (4) of that section, shall, on conviction, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees or with both] 4 [(3) Any money- lender or his agent who contravenes any provision of this, Act shall, on conviction, if such contravention is not punishable under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), be punishable with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees.] 5 Substituted by the Orissa Money-Lenders (Amendment) Act, 1975 (Orissa Act 54 of 1975), s. 10. Substituted by the Orissa Money-Lenders (Amendment) Act, 1976 (Orissa Act 32 of 1976), s. 5. Inserted by the Orissa Money-Lending Laws (Amendment) Act, 1977 (Orissa Act 7 of 1977), s.2. Substituted by the Orissa Money-Lenders (Amendment) Act, 1976 (Orissa Act 32 of 1976), s. 5. Substituted by the Orissa Money-Lenders (Amendment) Act, 1975 (Orissa Act 54 of 1975). s. 10.
Orissa Money-Lenders Act, 1939_Section 20--> State(s): Orissa If after the commencement of this Act, any money-lender or his agent takes from a debtor at the time of advancing a loan or deducts out of the principal of such loan any premium or other exactions of a similar nature by whatever name called or known, such money-lender or his agent, as the case may be shall be punishable with fine, not exceeding twice the amount of such premium or exaction.]
Orissa Money-Lenders Act, 1939_Section 20-A--> State(s): Orissa Whoever abets any offence punishable under this Act shall, whether or not the offence abetted is committed, be punishable with the same punishment as is provided for the offence which has been abetted. Explanation: For the purposes of this Act, "abetment' has the meaning assigned to it in the Indian Penal Code.
Orissa Money-Lenders Act, 1939_Section 20-B--> State(s): Orissa (1)The State Government may confer, on an Executive Magistrate, the powers of a Judicial Magistrate of the first class or of the second class for the trial of the offences under this Act, and on such conferment of powers, the Executive Magistrate, on whom the powers are so conferred, shall be deemed, for the purposes of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, to be a Judicial Magistrate of the first class or of the second class, as the case may be. (2) An offence under this Act may be tried summarily by a Magistrate.
Orissa Money-Lenders Act, 1939_Section 20-C--> State(s): Orissa Every offence under this Act shall be cognizable and bailable.] 1 Inserted by the Orissa Money-Lenders (Amendment) Act, 1976 (Orissa Act 32 of 1976),s. 6.
Orissa Money-Lenders Act, 1939_Section 21--> State(s): Orissa Save as otherwise provided in section II nothing in this Act shall effect the powers of a Court under the Usurious Loans Act, 1918.
Orissa Money-Lenders Act, 1939_Section 22--> State(s): Orissa Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any other law or in anything having the force of law, any contract entered into between a money-lender and his debtor in respect of a loan advanced after the commencement of the Act providing for the payment of the amount due on such loan at any place outside the State of Orissa shall to that extent, be void, but this section shall not apply to contracts in respect of goods supplied on khata or on credit.
Orissa Money-Lenders Act, 1939_Section 23--> State(s): Orissa (1) When a debtor tenders to a money-lender or his agent money on account of any interest due on a loan or on account of a principal of a loan and the money-lender or his agent refuses to receive the amount tendered or refuses to grant a receipt for the same, the debtor may deposit, if any Court in which the money-lender might have instituted suit for the recovery or such interest or such loan, to the account of the money-lender the amount tendered as aforesaid. (2) The Court shall thereupon forthwith grant a receipt for the deposit under the seal of the Court and cause a written notice of the deposit to be served upon the money-lender. (3) The money-lender may at any time within three years after the date of the service upon him of the notice mentioned in sub-section (2) make an application: to the Court praying for the amount deposited as aforesaid to be paid to him. (4) If no application is made under sub-section (3) within the period mentioned in the said sub-section, the amount deposited shall be disposed of in the prescribed manner. (5) Upon receipt of an application under sub-section (3) the Court may order such amount to be paid to the applicant upon such terms and subject to such conditions as may be specified in the order.
Orissa Money-Lenders Act, 1939_Section 24--> State(s): Orissa A receipt given by the Court under sub-section (2) of section 23 shall operate as an acquittance for the amount deposited as aforesaid in the same manner and to the same extent as if that amount had been received by the money-lender to whose credit the deposit was made, on the date of such deposit.
Orissa Money-Lenders Act, 1939_Section 25--> State(s): Orissa A debtor may repay the whole or any part of the principal or interest due under a loan to the money-lender at any time and in any manner and any agreement between a money -lender and a debtor to the contrary imposing restrictions on the freedom of repayment shall be illegal and void. Explanation: An agreement entered into by a debtor prohibiting either absolutely or conditionally, repayment of the principal or interest due under a loan until after the expiry of a certain period of time shall be void.
Orissa Money-Lenders Act, 1939_Section 26--> State(s): Orissa (1) The State Government may make rules 1 for the purpose of carrying out all or any of the purposes of this Act. (2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, the State Government may make rules- (a) prescribing the form of the register mentioned in sub-section (1) of [section 4-A] 2 and the particulars to be contained in such a register; (b) prescribing the form of the registration certificate mentioned in sub-section (4) of section 5; (c) prescribing the particulars to be contained in an application made under sub-section (1) of section 5 ; (d) prescribing the registration fee to be paid on the applications made under sub-section (1) of section 5; (e) providing for and regulating the supply of copies of the account mentioned in clause (a) of section 7; (f) providing for and regulating the grant of periodical statements of account to a debtor signed by the money lender or his agent showing the balance or amount that might be outstanding against such debtor on account of the principal and interest at the time of furnishing the said statement and the amount of every payment received by the money-lender in respect of the loan and the date of such payment during the period to which the statement relates; (g) prescribing the particulars to be contained in a plaint in a suit by a money-lender as defined in sub-clause (l) or sub-clause (2) of clause (j) of section 2; (h) for estimating the value of the property under section 14; (i) prescribing the period for appeal under sub-section (2) of section 181 and (j) prescribing the manner in which deposits made under sub-section (4) of section 23 shall be disposed of. (3) A draft of the rules proposed to be made under this section shall be laid on the table of the Orissa Legislative Assembly and the rules shall not be made unless the Assembly by resolution, approves the draft either without modifications or additions, or with modification or additions but, upon such approval being given, the rules may be made in the form in which they have been approved and such rules shall have force and effect after previous publication in the official gazette. For rules see Notification No. 4322-D., dated the 11th December, 1939. Substituted by the Orissa Money-Lenders (Amendment) Act. 1975 (Orissa Act 54 of 1975). s. 11.
Orissa Money-Lenders Act, 1939_Section 27--> State(s): Orissa The Madras Debtor's Protection Act, 1934, Usurious Loans (Central Provinces Amendment) Act, 1934, and the Central Provinces Money-lenders Act, 1934, and section 3 of the Agency Tract Interest and Land Transfer Act, 1917 in their application to the State of Orissa, are hereby repealed. 
