National Defence Fund (Orissa Collection) Act, 1963_Section Preamble--> State(s): Orissa An Act To Prohibit Unauthorised Collection In The State Of Orissa For The National Defence Fund BE it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Orissa in the Fourteenth Year of the Republic of India, as follows
National Defence Fund (Orissa Collection) Act, 1963_Section 1--> State(s): Orissa (1) This Act may be called the National Defence Fund (Orissa Collection) Act, 1963. (2) It extends to the whole of the State of Orissa. (3) It shall come into force at once.
National Defence Fund (Orissa Collection) Act, 1963_Section 2--> State(s): Orissa In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- (a) "collection" means only collection within the State of Orissa of any money or valuable thing ; (b) "Fund" means the National Defence Fund created by the Central Government for purposes relating to the defence of India and any of the branches of the said Fund in operation within the State of Orissa including the National Defence Fund (Orissa Branch) created by the State Government.
National Defence Fund (Orissa Collection) Act, 1963_Section 3--> State(s): Orissa No collection for the Fund shall be made by any person except under the authority of and in accordance with the terms and conditions, if any, of an order made by- (a) the State Government in that behalf, or (b) any officer of the State Government specially authorised by them for the purpose.
National Defence Fund (Orissa Collection) Act, 1963_Section 4--> State(s): Orissa No such collection shall be made except in accordance with such procedure and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by rules made in this behalf : Provided that the State Government may, by order, grant exemption to any person or institution from the provisions of this section.
National Defence Fund (Orissa Collection) Act, 1963_Section 5--> State(s): Orissa All collections for the Fund made by persons authorised under section 3 shall be made over by the persons making the collections to such officers, offices, other persons or Banks as may be specified by the State Government by order made in this behalf.
National Defence Fund (Orissa Collection) Act, 1963_Section 6--> State(s): Orissa Any person making or aiding in any collection for the Fund except in accordance with the provisions of this Act shall be liable, on conviction, to imprisonment which may extend to three years or with fine or with both.
National Defence Fund (Orissa Collection) Act, 1963_Section 7--> State(s): Orissa An offence punishable under section 6 shall be cognizable.
National Defence Fund (Orissa Collection) Act, 1963_Section 8--> State(s): Orissa Nothing in this Act shall affect any collections made by, or any contributions voluntarily made over or remitted to, any person or authority or any Bank authorised by the Central Government to make such collections or to receive such contributions, as the case may be.
National Defence Fund (Orissa Collection) Act, 1963_Section 9--> State(s): Orissa The State Government may make rules1 to carry out the purposes of this Act and may for the said purpose from time to time issue such instructions and directions as they deem fit. For rules, see Notification No- 5101-Gen., dated 24th April 1963 published in Orissa Gazette Extraordinary, dated the 25th April 1965 (No. 300.)
National Defence Fund (Orissa Collection) Act, 1963_Section 10--> State(s): Orissa (i) The National Defence Fund (Orissa Collection) Ordinance, 1962, is hereby repealed, (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done, any action taken, any rules made or any orders issued in exercise of any power conferred by or under the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done, taken, made or issued in exercise of the powers conferred by or under this Act as if this Act was in force on the day on which such thing was done, action was taken, rules were made or order was issued. 
