Orissa Panchayat Samitis (Postponement of Election) Act, 1990_Section Preamble--> State(s): Orissa An Act to provide for the postponement of election to panchayat samitis in the state and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. Be it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Orissa in the Forty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Orissa Panchayat Samitis (Postponement of Election) Act, 1990_Section 1--> State(s): Orissa (1) This Act may be called the Orissa Panchayat Samitis (Postponement of Election) Act, 1990. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 26th day of January, 1990.
Orissa Panchayat Samitis (Postponement of Election) Act, 1990_Section 2--> State(s): Orissa In the Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- (a) 'Panchayat Samiti' means a Panchayat Samiti constituted under the Panihayat Samiti Act; (b) 'Panchayat Samiti Act" means the Orissa Panchayat Samiti Act, 1959; (c) words and expressions used but not defined shall have the meanings as assigned to them respectively in the Panchayat -Samiti Act.
Orissa Panchayat Samitis (Postponement of Election) Act, 1990_Section 3--> State(s): Orissa (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Panchayat Samit Act, or an) Notification or order issued thereunder,- (a) the election of member including the Chairman for reconstitution of every Panchayat Samit of the State shall be held within 1 [the 31st January, 1992]; (b) during the period beginning with the date of commencement of this Act and until the reconstitition of the Panchayat Samiti, the powers and duties of every Panchayat Samiti and its Chairman shall be exorcised and discharged by the Sub-Collector having jurisdiction over the concerned Block. (2) The election of members including the Chairman as referred to in clause (a) of sub-section 0) shall be held in accordance with the Panchayat Samiti Act and the rules made thereunder. (3) The Panchayat Samiti so reconstituted shall, for all intents and purposes, be deemed to have been constituted under, and be governed by, the provisions of the Panchayat Samiti Act and the rules made thereunder. Substituted by the Orissa Panchayat Samitis (Postponement of Election) Second Amendment Act, 1991 (Orissa Act 23 of 1991) s. 2.
Orissa Panchayat Samitis (Postponement of Election) Act, 1990_Section 4--> State(s): Orissa (1) The Orisia Panchayat Samitis (Postponement of Election) Ordinance, 1990 is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the Ordinance so repealed shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the provisions of this Act. 
