Orissa Panchayati Raj Finance Commission (Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Act, 1996_Section Preamble--> State(s): Orissa An Act To Amend The Orissa Panchayati Raj Finance Commission (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1993 BE it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Orissa in the Forty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows :-
Orissa Panchayati Raj Finance Commission (Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Act, 1996_Section 1--> State(s): Orissa (1)This Act may be called the Orissa Panchayati Raj Finance Commission (Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Act, 1996. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 18th day of October, 1996-
Orissa Panchayati Raj Finance Commission (Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Act, 1996_Section 2--> State(s): Orissa In Section 1 of the Orissa Panchayati Raj Finance Commission (Miscellaneous Oriasa Act Provision's) Act, 1993 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in sub-section (1), 28 of 1993. the words "Panchayati Raj" shall be omitted.
Orissa Panchayati Raj Finance Commission (Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Act, 1996_Section 3--> State(s): Orissa In Section 2 of the principal Act,- (i) after clause (b), the following clause shall be inserted, namely :- '(b-1) "institution" means any Panchayati Raj Institution or a Municipality'; and (ii) after clause (c), the following clause shall be inserted, namely : - '(c-1) "Municipality" means a Municipality as defined in the Orissa Municipal Act, 1950'.
Orissa Panchayati Raj Finance Commission (Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Act, 1996_Section 4--> State(s): Orissa In the Principal Act, for Sections 3, 4 and 5, the following Sections shall be substituted, namely :- "3. The Commission shall consist of a Chairman and four other members out of whom one shall be appointed as the Member-Secretary: Provided that Governor may increase the number of such other members if he considers it SD expedient in the interest of the Panchayati Raj Institutions and Municipalities. 4. (1) The Chairman of the Commission shall be,- (?) a serving or a retired Judge of the High Court; or (b) a person of eminence with substantial experience in public affairs ; or (c) a serving or retired Government Servant with wide experience in the field of administration ; or (d) an eminent economist. (2) The members other than Member-Secretary of the Commission shall be selected from among the persons who- (a) have special knowledge in public finance and accounts ; or (b) have had wide experience in the field of public finance and administration ; or (c) have special knowledge and experience relating to local self-Government in both urban and rural areas ; or (d) have special knowledge of economics. 5. The Member-Secretary of the Commission shall be appointed by the Governor from amongst officers belonging to the All India Service or any State Cadre, who have had at least ten years of service under the State Government and have adequate knowledge in public finance.".
Orissa Panchayati Raj Finance Commission (Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Act, 1996_Section 5--> State(s): Orissa In section 8 of the principal Act,- (i) for sub-sections (1) and (2) the following sub-sections shall be substitute d namely:- "(1) Every member including the Chairman of the Commission shall hold office for such period as may be specified in the notification of the Governor appointing him, but shall be eligible for re-appointment: Provided that he may, by letter addressed to the Governor, resign his office- (2) The members of the Commission shall render whole time or part-time service to the Commission as the Governor may, in each case, specify"; and (ii) in clause (c) of sub-section (3), after the words "Panchayati Raj Institution", the words "or Municipalites" shall be inserted.
Orissa Panchayati Raj Finance Commission (Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Act, 1996_Section 6--> State(s): Orissa In section 9 of the principal Act,- (i) in sub-section (1) after the words "Panchayati Raj institutions" wherever they occur, the words "and the Municipalities" shall be inserted; and (ii) in sub-section (2), in clause (a) after the words "Panchayati Raj institution", the words "or a Municipality" shall be inserted.
Orissa Panchayati Raj Finance Commission (Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Act, 1996_Section 7--> State(s): Orissa In the principal Act, for Section 11, the following Section shall be substituted, namely:- "11. There shall be paid to members of the Commission including the Chairman and the Member-Secretary such fees or salaries and such allowances as the State Government may, by notification, determine.".
Orissa Panchayati Raj Finance Commission (Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Act, 1996_Section 8--> State(s): Orissa In the principal Act, in sub-section (2) of Section 13, for the word "Secretary", the words "Member-Secretary" shall be substituted.
Orissa Panchayati Raj Finance Commission (Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Act, 1996_Section 9--> State(s): Orissa In the principal Act, in Section 15, sub-section (2) shall be omitted.
Orissa Panchayati Raj Finance Commission (Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Act, 1996_Section 10--> State(s): Orissa (1). The Orissa Panchayati Raj Finance Commission (Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Ordinance, 1996 is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the principal Act as amended by the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the principal Act as amended by this Act. 
