Registration (Odisha Amendment) Act, 2013_Section Preamble--> State(s): Orissa An Act further to Amend the Registration Act, 1908 in its application to the State of Odisha. Be it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Odisha in the Sixty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Registration (Odisha Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 1--> State(s): Orissa This Act may be called the Registration (Odisha Amendment) Act, 2013.
Registration (Odisha Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 2--> State(s): Orissa In the Registration Act, 1908, for section 22-A, the following section shall be substituted, namely:- 22-A "Refusal to register certain documents - (1) The registering officer shall refuse to register,- (a) any instrument relating to the transfer of immovable properties by way of sale, gift, mortgage, exchange or lease,- (i) belonging to the State Government, or the Local Authority; (ii) belonging to any religious institution to which the Odisha Hindu Religious Endowment Act, 1951 is applicable. (iii) belonging to or recorded in the name of Lord Jagannath, Puri; (iv) donated for Bhoodan Yagna and vested in the Odislia Bhoodan Yagna Samiti established under section 3 of the Odisha Bhoodan and Gramdan Act, 1970; (v) belonging to Wakfs which are under the supervision of the Odisha Wakf Board established under the Wakf Act, 1995; unless a sanction in this regard, issued by the competent authority as provided under the relevant Act or in absence of any such authority, an authority so authorised by the State Government for this purpose, is produced before the registering officer; Explanation - for the purpose of this section Local Authority means any Municipal Corporation. Municipality, Notified Area Council, Zilla Parisad, Grama Panchayat, Urban Development Authority and Planning Authority or any Local Self Government constituted under any law for the time being in force. (b) the instrument relating to cancellation of sale deeds without the consent of the person claiming under the said sale deed: and (c) any instrument relating to transfer of immovable property, the alienation or transfer of which is prohibited under any State or the Central Act. (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the registering officer shall not register any document presented to him for registration unless the transferor produce the record of rights for the satisfaction of the registering officer that such transferor has right, title and interest over the property so transferred. Explanation - For the purpose of this sub-section 'record-of-rights' means the record of rights as defined under the Odisha Survey and Settlement Act, 1958. By Order of the Governor M. R. Parida Principal Secretary to Government, I/c. 
