Orissa Additional Sales Tax Act, 1975_Section Preamble--> State(s): Orissa An Act to provide for levy of additional tax on sale or purchase of goods in Orissa. Be it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Orissa in the Twenty-sixth Year of the Republic of India, as follows:-
Orissa Additional Sales Tax Act, 1975_Section 1--> State(s): Orissa (1) This Act may be called the Orissa Additional Sales Tax Act, 1975. (2) It shall extend to the whole of the State of Orissa. (3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 1st day of April, 1975.
Orissa Additional Sales Tax Act, 1975_Section 2--> State(s): Orissa In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires- (a) "declared goods" shall have the same meaning as in clause (c) of section 2 of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956; (b) words and expressions used but not defined shall have the same meanings as are respectively assigned to them in the Orissa Sales Tax Act, 1947 (hereinafter referred to as the said Act). Substituted by the Orissa Additional Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1979 (Or. Act 3 of 1979), s. 2, w. e. f. the 1st April, 1979.
Orissa Additional Sales Tax Act, 1975_Section 3--> State(s): Orissa (1) Every dealer shall, in addition to the tax payable by him for a year under the said Act, be liable to pay additional tax at such rate not exceeding one	percent of his gross turnover for that year, as may be notified, from time to time, by the State Government : Provided that no additional tax as aforesaid shall be payable on that part of the gross turnover which relates to sale and purchase of declared goods: Provided further that the State Government may, by notification, subject to such conditions, and restrictions, if any, exempt any class of dealers or the turnover relating to any goods or class of goods from the levy of the additional tax and likewise withdraw any such exemption. (2) The provisions of the said Act shall, mutatis mutandis apply in relation to the said additional tax as they apply in relation to the tax payable under the said Act.]
Orissa Additional Sales Tax Act, 1975_Section 4--> State(s): Orissa (1) The State Government may make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. (2) All rules made under this Act shall, as soon as may be after they are made, be laid before the State Legislature for a total period of fourteen days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions and if during the said period State Legislature makes modifications, if any, therein, the rules shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form; so, however, that such modifications shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under the rules. 
