Code of Criminal Procedure (Orissa Amendment) Act, 2002_Section Preamble--> State(s): Orissa An Act to amend THE Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 in its application to the State of Orissa. BE it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Orissa in the Fifty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Code of Criminal Procedure (Orissa Amendment) Act, 2002_Section 1--> State(s): Orissa This Act may be called the Code of Criminal Procedure (Orissa Amendment) Act, 2002.
Code of Criminal Procedure (Orissa Amendment) Act, 2002_Section 2--> State(s): Orissa In Section 9 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), to sub-section (3), the following provisions shall be added, namely:- "Provided that notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Code, an Additional Sessions Judge in a district or subdivision, other than the district or subdivision, by whatever name called, wherein the headquarters of the Sessions Judge are situated, exercising jurisdiction in a Court of Sessions shall have all the powers of the Sessions Judge under this Code, in respect of the cases and the proceedings in the Criminal Courts in that district or subdivision for the purposes of sub-section (7) of Section 116, Sections 193 and 194, clause (a) of Section 209 and Sections 409 and 449: Provided further (hat the above powers shall not be in derogation of the powers otherwise exercisable by an Additional Sessions Judge or a Sessions Judge under this Code."
Code of Criminal Procedure (Orissa Amendment) Act, 2002_Section 3--> State(s): Orissa In the first Schedule to the principal Act, for the existing entries relating to Sections 272, 273, 274, 275 and 276, the following entries shall respectively be substituted, namely :- Section Offence Punishment Cognizable or non-cognizable Bailable or non-bailable By what Court triable (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) . 272. Adulterating food or drink intended for sale, so as to make the same noxious. Imprisonment for life and fine. Cognizable Non-bailable Court of Session. 273. Selling any food or drink as food and drink, knowing the same to be noxious. Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto 274. Adulterating any drug or medical preparation intended for sale so as to lessen its efficacy, or to change its operation, or to make it noxious. Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto 275. Offering for sale or issuing from a dispensary any drug or medical preparation-known to have been adulterated. Imprisonment for life and fine. Cognizable Non-bailable Court of Session. 276. Knowingly selling or issuing from a dispensary any drug or medical preparation as a different drug or medical preparation. Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto.. 
