Orissa Contingency Fund Act, 1967_Section Preamble--> State(s): Orissa An Act To Provide For The Establishment And Maintenance of A Contingency Fund For The State Of Orissa Be it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Orissa in the Eighteenth Year of the Republic of India, as follows: -
Orissa Contingency Fund Act, 1967_Section 1--> State(s): Orissa (1) This Act may be called the Orissa Contingency Fund Act, 1967. (2) It extends to the whole of the State of Orissa (3) It shall come into force at once.
Orissa Contingency Fund Act, 1967_Section 2--> State(s): Orissa (1) There shall be established for the State of Orissa a Contingency Fund called "the Contingency Fund of Orissa' and consisting of a sum of 1 [twenty crores of rupees] transferred from the Consolidated Fund of the State. (2) Such Contingency Fund shall be at the disposal of the Governor of Orissa and he shall have authority to make advances there from for the purpose of meeting any unforeseen expenditure, pending authorization of such expenditure by the Legislature of the State under appropriation made by law. (3) As often as any such expenditure is authorized by law as aforesaid, the State Government shall recoup to the Contingency Fund an amount equal to the advance taken from such Fund to meet the expenditure. Substituted by the Orissa Contingency Fund (Amendment) Act, 1980 (Act 2 of 1980).
Orissa Contingency Fund Act, 1967_Section 3--> State(s): Orissa The State Government may make rules for the purpose of carrying into effect the provisions of this Act.
Orissa Contingency Fund Act, 1967_Section 4--> State(s): Orissa (1) The Orissa Contingency Fund (No. 2) Ordinance,. 1967 is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, the Contingency Fund established under the said Ordinance and anything done, any action taken or any rules made there under shall be deemed to have been established, done, taken or made under this Act as if this Act -were in force on. the day on which such Fund was established, such thing was done, such action was taken or such, rules were made. 
