Court Fees (Orissa Amendment) Act, 1992_Section Preamble--> State(s): Orissa AN Act To Amend the Court Fees Act. 1870 in its application to the State of Orissa. Be it enacted by the Legislature of the Slate of Orissa in the Forty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows :-
Court Fees (Orissa Amendment) Act, 1992_Section 1--> State(s): Orissa (1) This Act may be called the Court Fees (Orissa Amendment) Act, 1992. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 14th day of August, 1992.
Court Fees (Orissa Amendment) Act, 1992_Section 2--> State(s): Orissa In Schedule I to the Court Fees Act, 1870 as amended in its application to the State of Orissa (hereinafter referred as the principal Act),- (a) in article, for the words 'Tinny-seven rupees fifty naye paise occurring as the last entry under the heading proper fee the words One hundred rupees shall be substituted ; (b) in the foot note to the Table of rates of advalorem fees appearing under heading (a) Table of rates of advalorem fees leviable on plaints, etc., mentioned in Article 1 of Schedule I, for the words 'thirty-seven rupees fifty naye paise, the words, one hundred rupees. shall be substituted.
Court Fees (Orissa Amendment) Act, 1992_Section 3--> State(s): Orissa In Schedule II to the principal Act, under the heading proper fee for the entries as mentioned in column (2) of the following Table against the corresponding articles in column (1) thereof, the entries as mentioned against them in column (3) of the said Table shall respectively be substituted Corresponding Article Entries Occurring under the heading proper fee Entries to be substituted (1) (2) (3) 1.(a) Forty-five paise One rupee (b) In case of criminal complaint and appeal, two rupees and twenty-five paise and in oilier cases one rupee and twenty-paise. Incase of criminal complaint and appeal, four rupees and in other cases two rupees. (c) Two rupees and fifty paise Five rupees (d) (i) (a) Five rupees and fifty paise Eleven rupees (b) Eleven rupees Twenty rupees (ii) Two rupees and twenty paise Four rupees 1-A One rupee and sixty-five paise in addition to any fee levied on the application under clause (a), clause (b) or clause (d) of article-1 of this Schedule. Three rupees in addition to any fee levied on the application under clause (a), clause (b) or clause (d) of article-1 of this Schedule. 2. Fifty-five paise One rupee 3. (a) One rupee and ten paise Two rupees (b) Two rupees and twenty paise Four rupees 4. Fifty naye paise One rupee 5. Fifty naye paise One rupee 6. Fifty naye paise One rupee 7. Fifty naye paise One rupee 10. (a) Two rupees and twenty-five paise Four rupees (6) Three rupees and seventy-five paise Seven rupees (e) Four rupees Eight rupees One rupee Two rupees (b) Four rupees Eight rupees 12. Ten rupees Twenty rupees 13. Five rupees and fifty paise Ten rupees 14. Eleven rupees Twenty-one rupees 17. Fifteen rupees Thirty rupees 17. A (a) Ten rupees Twenty rupees (b) Fifteen rupees if the value for purposes of jurisdiction does not exceed four thousand rupees. One hundred rupees if such value exceeds four thousand rupees. Thirty rupees if the value for purposes of jurisdiction does not exceed four thousand rupees. Two hundred rupees if such value exceeds four thousand rupees. 18. Sixteen rupees and fifty paise Thirty-two rupees 19. Fifteen rupees Thirty rupees 20. Thirty-three rupees Sixty-two rupees 21. Thirty rupees Sixty rupees
Court Fees (Orissa Amendment) Act, 1992_Section 4--> State(s): Orissa (1) The Court Fees (Orissa Amendment) Ordinance, 1992 is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the principal Act as amended, by the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the principal Act as amended by this Act. 
