Court-fees (Odisha Amendment) Act, 2012_Section Preamble--> State(s): Orissa An Act Further to amend the Court-Fees Act, 1870 in its Application to this State of Odisha BE it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Odisha in the Sixty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Court-fees (Odisha Amendment) Act, 2012_Section 1--> State(s): Orissa (1) This Act may be called the Court-fees (Odisha Amendment) Act, 2012.
Court-fees (Odisha Amendment) Act, 2012_Section 2--> State(s): Orissa In Article 1 of Schedule-II to the Court-fees Act, 1870 in its application to the State of Odisha, for clause (b) including the entries under the second and third columns thereof, the following shall be substituted under appropriate column, namely:- "(b) (i) When containing a complaint or charge of any offence other than the complaint for the offence under section 138 of the Negotiable Instrument Act, 1881 and an offence for which Police Officers may under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 arrest without warrant, and presented to any Criminal Court; In the case of a criminal compla i nt and appeal , four rupees and in other cases two rupees. or when presented to a Civil, Criminal or Revenue Court or to a Collector, or any Revenue Officer having jurisdiction equal or sub-ordinate to a Collector; or to any Magistrate in his executive capacity and not otherwise provided for by this Act; or to deposit in Revenue Court or rent; or for determination by a Court of the amount of compensation to be paid by a landlord to his tenant. (ii) Complaint for the offence under section 138 of the Negotiable Instrument Act, 1881- When the amount involved in the cheque or instrument does not exceed ten thousand rupees. One hundred rupees. When the amount involved in the cheque or instrument exceeds ten thousand rupees but does not exceed one lakh rupees. Five hundred rupees. When the amount involved in the cheque or instrument exceeds one lakh rupees. One thousand rupees. By Order of the Governor S. K. Mohanty Principal Secretary to Government I/c. 
