Orissa Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 2006_Section Preamble--> State(s): Orissa An Act further to Amend the Orissa Land Reforms Act, 1960. Be it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Orissa in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows: -
Orissa Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 2006_Section 1--> State(s): Orissa This Act may be called the Orissa Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 2006
Orissa Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 2006_Section 2--> State(s): Orissa In the Orissa Land Reforms Act, 1960 (hereinafter referred to as the Principal Act), in section 8-A,- (i) in sub-section (1), for clauses (b) and (c) the following clauses shall be substituted, namely - "(b) in every case where the authorised officer allows conversion of the use of any agricultural land under clause (a), the raiyat is required to pay conversion fees for such land, calculated at the rate specified in sub-section (2) and the kissam of the land so converted shall be corrected accordingly; (c) where the conversion of the use of any agricultural land by a raiyat for the purposes other than agricultural has been made prior to the commencement of the Orissa Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1993 or, where the land has been transferred by the raiyat to any other person prior to such commencement, and the transferee uses the land for the purpose other than agriculture, without paying the premium fixed therefor as per the provisions existing prior to the commencement of the Orissa Land Reforms (Amendments) Act, 2006, such raiyat or such transferee, as the case may be, is required to pay conversion fees within the prescribed period and in the prescribed manner in respect of that land as calculated at the rate equivalent to fifty percentum of the rate of conversion fees specified against that category of the land in sub-section (2) and the kissam of the land so converted shall, after the payment, be corrected accordingly: Provided that if the conversion fees so payable is not paid within the prescribed period it shall be recoverable as an arrear of land revenue. (d) the lands which were deemed to have been surrendered to Government and settled on lease basis under the provisions of the Orissa Government Land Settlement Act, 1962, prior to the date of commencement of the Orissa Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 2006, shall cease to be so surrendered and settled on lease basis and be held freely by the raiyat or the transferee, as the case may be."; and (ii) for sub-sections (2) and (3) the following sub-sections shall be substituted, namely :- "(2) The rate at which the conversion fees shall be payable per acre of agricultural land situated at different places of the State, for conversion of its use to any purpose other than agriculture on and after the commencement of the Orissa Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1993 shall be as follows :- (i) Land situated within any Municipal area or in areas within one-half kilometer on either side of such National Highways as the State Government may, by notification, specify from time to time. Rs. 3,00,000/- (ii) Land situated in any area within one-fourth kilometre one-further side of such State Highways as the State Government may, by notification specify from time to time. Rs. 1,00,000/- (iii) Land situated in a Municipal area or a Notified area, or in any area notified as Urban area under the Orissa Government Land Settlement Rules, 1983 made under the Orissa Government Land Settlement Act, 1962, other than any land mentioned in clauses (i) and (ii). Rs. 75,000/- (iv) Land situated in such developing areas as the State Government may, by notification, specify, from time to time, other than any area covered by clauses (i), (ii) and (iii). Rs. 30,000/- (v) Land situated in any area not covered by clauses (i), (ii), (iii) and (iv). Five percentum of the market value of such land or Rs. 1,000/-, whichever is more. Explanation - For the purpose of this sub-section,- (a) "Municipal Act" means the Orissa Municipal Act, 1950; (b) "Municipal area" means an area included in a Municipality constituted under the Municipal Act; and (c) "Notified area" means a Notified area within the meaning of section 417-A of the Municipal Act. (3) The lease documents executed on or before the date of commencement of the Orissa Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 2006, for the purpose of conversion under this section shall be in operative and the premium paid for such lease shall be treated to be conversion fee.".
Orissa Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 2006_Section 3--> State(s): Orissa In section 58 of the Principal Act, in sub-section (1) after the figure 4 and before the figures and brackets 9(4), the figure and letter "8-A" shall be inserted. By order of the Governor D. K. Sahu Principal Secretary to Government 
