Rajasthan Laws (Amendment) Act, 2012_Section Preamble--> State(s): Rajasthan An Act further to amend the Rajasthan Land Revenue Act, 1956, the Jaipur Development Authority Act, 1982, the Jodhpur Development Authority Act, 2009, the Rajasthan Urban Improvement Act, 1959 and the Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 2009. Be enacted by the Rajasthan State Legislature in the Sixty-third Year of the Republic of India, as follows:-
Rajasthan Laws (Amendment) Act, 2012_Section 1--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) This Act may be called the Rajasthan Laws (Amendment) Act, 2012. (2) It shall come into force at once.
Rajasthan Laws (Amendment) Act, 2012_Section 2--> State(s): Rajasthan After the existing sub-section (5) of Section 90-A of the Rajasthan Land Revenue Act, 1956 (Act No. 15 of 1956), hereinafter in this Chapter referred to as the principal Act, the following new sub-sections shall be added, namely:- "(6) Where permission under this section is sought with respect to a land situated in an urban area, the permission shall be granted only if the desired non-agricultural purpose is permissible in accordance with the law applicable in that area and is in consonance with the maser plan or any other development plan or scheme, by whatever name called, in force, if any, in that area. (7) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Act or any other law for the time being in force, when an order granting permission under this section is passed with respect to a land situated in an urban area, on and from the date of such order,- (a) tenancy rights over such land of the person to whom permission under this section is granted shall stand extinguished; and (b) the land shall be deemed to have been placed at the disposal of the local authority under Section 102-A and shall be available for allotment to the person to whom permission is granted under this section, or to the successors, assignees or transferees of such person, by the local authority for any permissible non-agricultural purposes in accordance with the rules, regulations or bye-laws made under the law applicable to the local authority, subject to the payment to the local authority of urban assessment or premium or both leviable and recoverable under sub-section (4). (8) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Act and the Rajasthan Tenancy Act, 1955 (Act No.3 of 1955) where before 17th June, 1999 any person, holding any land for agricultural purposes in an urban area or within the urbanisable limits or peripheral belt of an urban area, has used or has allowed to be used such land or part thereof for non-agricultural purposes or, has parted with possession of such land or part thereof for consideration by way of sale or agreement to sell and or by executing power of attorney and/or Will or in any other manner for purported non-agricultural use, the rights and interest of such person in the said land or holding or part thereof, as the case may be, shall be liable to be terminated and the officer authorized by the State Government in this behalf, shall, after affording an opportunity of being heard to such person and recording reasons in writing for doing so, order for termination of his rights and interest in such land and thereupon the land shall vest in the State Government free from all encumbrances and be deemed to have been placed at the disposal of the local authority under Section 102-A and shall be available for allotment or regularization by the local authority for any permissible non- agricultural purposes in accordance with the rules; regulations or bye-laws made under the law applicable to the local authority to the persons having possession over such land or part thereof, as the case may be, on the basis of allotment made, or Patta given, by a Housing Co-operative Society or on the basis of any document of sale or agreement to sell or power of attorney or a Will or any other document purporting transfer of land to them either by the person whose rights and interests have been ordered to be terminated under this sub-section or by any other person claiming through such person, subject to the payment to the local authority of urban assessment or premium or both leviable and recoverable under sub-section (4): Provided that- (i) nothing in this sub-section shall apply to any land belonging to deity, Devasthan Department, any public trust or any religious or charitable institution or a wakf; (ii) no proceedings or orders under this sub-section shall be initiated or made in respect of lands for which proceedings under the provisions of the Urban Land (Ceiling and Regulation) Act, 1976 (Central Act No. 33 of 1976), the Rajasthan Imposition of Ceiling on Agricultural Holdings Act, 1973 (Act No. 11 of 1973) and the Rajasthan Land Reforms and Acquisition of Land Owners Estate Act, 1963 (Act No. 11 of 1964) are pending. (9) Any person aggrieved by an order of an officer or authority made under this section may appeal within thirty days from the date of such order to such officer not below the rank of Collector as may be authorized by the State Government in this behalf, who shall, as far as practicable, disposed of such appeal within a period of sixty days from the date of its presentation and if he is unable to dispose of the. appeal within the aforesaid period, he shall record reasons therefor. An order passed under this sub-section shall be final. Explanation.- For the purposes of this section,- (a) "local authority", in relation to a local area, means an authority constituted or designated for, or entrusted with the function of, planned development of that area and includes an Urban Improvement Trust constituted under the Rajasthan Urban Improvement Act, 1959 (Act No. 35 of 1959), the Jaipur Development Authority constituted under the Jaipur Development Authority Act, 1982 (Act No. 25 of 1982), the Jodhpur Development Authority constituted under the Jodhpur Development Authority Act, 2009 (Act No. 2 of 2009) or a Municipality constituted under the Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 2009 (Act No. 18 of 2009); (b) "urban area" means an area falling within Jaipur region as defined in clause (8) of Section 2 of the Jaipur Development Authority Act, 1982 (Act No. 25 of 1982), Jodhpur region as defined in clause (8) of Section 2 of the Jodhpur Development Authority Act, 2009 (Act No.2 of 2009) or a municipal area as defined in clause (xxxix) of Section 2 of the Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 2009 (Act No. 18 of 2009) or an area specified as such in a notification issued under Section 3 of the Rajasthan Urban Improvement Act, 1959 (Act No. 35 of 1959) or an area for which a local authority is constituted or designated under any law for the time being in force; (c) "urbanisable limits" means the urbanisable limits indicated in the master plan or master development plan of a city or town prepared under any law for the time being in force and where there is no master plan or master development plan, the outer limits of the municipal area; (d) "peripheral belt" means the peripheral belt indicated in the master plan or master development plan of a city or town prepared under any law for the time being in force and where there is no master plan or master development plan or where peripheral belt is not indicated in such plan, the area as may be notified by the State Government from time to time.".
Rajasthan Laws (Amendment) Act, 2012_Section 3--> State(s): Rajasthan The existing Section 90-B of the principal Act shall be deleted.
Rajasthan Laws (Amendment) Act, 2012_Section 4--> State(s): Rajasthan For the existing sub-section (1) of Section 54-B of the Jaipur Development Authority Act, 1982 (Act No. 25 of 1982), the following shall be substituted, namely:- "(1) Any land deemed to have been placed at the disposal of the Authority under Section 90-A of the Rajasthan Land Revenue Act, 1956 (Act No. 15 of 1956) shall be available for allotment or regularization by the Authority to the person or persons, as the case may be, specified in that section subject to the terms and conditions prescribed, and on payment to the Authority of the urban assessment or premium or both leviable and recoverable, under that section.".
Rajasthan Laws (Amendment) Act, 2012_Section 5--> State(s): Rajasthan For the existing sub-section (1) of Section 49 of the Jodhpur Development Authority Act, 2009 (Act No. 2 of 2009), the following shall be substituted, namely:- "(1) Any land deemed to have been placed at the disposal of the Authority under Section 90-A of the Rajasthan Land Revenue Act, 1956 (Act No. 15 of 1956) shall be vailable for allotment or regularization by the Authority to the person or persons, as the case may be, specified in that section subject to the terms and conditions prescribed, and on payment to the Authority of the urban assessment or premium or both leviable and recoverable, under that section.".
Rajasthan Laws (Amendment) Act, 2012_Section 6--> State(s): Rajasthan For the existing sub-section (4) of Section 60 of the Rajasthan Urban Improvement Act, 1959 (Act No. 35 of 1959), the following shall be substituted, namely:- "(4) Any land deemed to have been placed at the disposal of the Trust under Section 90-A of the Rajasthan Land Revenue Act, 1956 (Act No. 15 of 1956) shall be available for allotment or regularization by the Trust to the person or persons, as the case may be, specified in that section subject to the terms and conditions prescribed, and on payment to the Trust of the urban assessment or premium or both leviable and recoverable, under that section.".
Rajasthan Laws (Amendment) Act, 2012_Section 7--> State(s): Rajasthan For the existing sub-section (1) of Section 71 of the Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 2009 (Act No. 18 of 2009), hereinafter in this Chapter referred to as the principal Act, the following shall be substituted, namely:- "(1) Any land deemed to have been placed at the disposal of the Municipality under Section 90-A of the Rajasthan Land Revenue Act, 1956 (Act No. 15 of 1956) shall be available for allotment or regularization by the Municipality to the person or persons, as the case may be, specified in that section subject to the terms and conditions prescribed, and on payment to the Municipality of the urban assessment or premium or both leviable and recoverable, under that section.".
Rajasthan Laws (Amendment) Act, 2012_Section 8--> State(s): Rajasthan The existing clause (xviii) of sub-section (2) of Section 337 of the principal Act shall be deleted. 
