Matsya University, Alwar (Change of Name) Act, 2014_Section Preamble--> State(s): Rajasthan An Act to change the name of the Matsya University, Alwar and to make certain amendments in the Matsya University, Alwar Act, 2012. Be it enacted by the Rajasthan State Legislature in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of India, as follows:-
Matsya University, Alwar (Change of Name) Act, 2014_Section 1--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) This Act may be called the Matsya University, Alwar (Change of Name) Act, 2014. (2) It shall come into force at once.
Matsya University, Alwar (Change of Name) Act, 2014_Section 2--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) The name of the Matsya University, Alwar incorporated under the Matsya University, Alwar Act, 2012 (Act No. 27 of 2012), hereinafter referred to as the principal Act, shall, as from the date of commencement of this Act, be the Raj Rishi Bhartrihari Matsya University, Alwar. (2) Any reference to the Matsya University, Alwar in any law for the time being in force or in any indenture, instrument or other documents shall be read and construed as a reference to that University under its name as altered by this Act. (3) Nothing in this Act shall affect the continuity of the corporate status of the said University.
Matsya University, Alwar (Change of Name) Act, 2014_Section 3--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) As from the date of commencement of this Act, the principal Act shall stand amended to the extent and in the manner specified in the Schedule to this Act. (2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall be without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of section 2.
Matsya University, Alwar (Change of Name) Act, 2014_Section 4--> State(s): Rajasthan The principal Act may be cited as the Raj Rishi Bhartrihari Matsya University, Alwar Act, 2012.
Matsya University, Alwar (Change of Name) Act, 2014_Section Sch.--> State(s): Rajasthan (See section 3) Long Title.- In long title, for the existing expression "Matsya University at Alwar", the expression "Raj Rishi Bhartrihari Matsya University at Alwar" shall be substituted. Section 1.- In sub-section (1), for the existing expression "the Matsya University, Alwar", the expression "the Raj Rishi Bhartrihari Matsya University, Alwar" shall be substituted. Section 2.- For the existing clause (o), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:- "(o) "University" means the Raj Rishi Bhartrihari Matsya University, Alwar incorporated under section 3;". Section 3.- In sub-section (1), for the existing expression "the Matsya University, Alwar", the expression "the Raj Rishi Bhartrihari Matsya University, Alwar" shall be substituted. Principal Secretary to the Government. 
