Rajasthan Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1951_Section Preamble--> State(s): Rajasthan An Act to provide for the imposition of tax on Motor Vehicles throughout 1 [the State of Rajasthan]. WHEREAS it is expedient to impose a tax on Motor Vehicles in 2 [the State of Rajasthan]; It is hereby enacted as follows:- Substituted by Raj 27 of 1957. Substituted by Rajasthan 27 of 1957.
Rajasthan Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1951_Section 1--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) This Act may be called the Rajasthan Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1951.1 2 [(2) It extends to the whole of the State of Rajasthan]. (3) It shall come in to force on such 3 [date] as the 4 [State Government] may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. Made by His Highness the Rajpramukh on the 1st day of April, 1951 Came into force w.e.f. 3-4-1951 by Notification D/499/Home/51, dated 3-4-51. Came into force w.e.f. 3-4-51 by Notification D/499/Home/51, dated 3-4-51. Substituted by Raj 27 of 1957.
Rajasthan Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1951_Section 2--> State(s): Rajasthan In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context,- 1 (a) "Additional Transport Commissioner" means the person appointed by the State Government to be the Additional Transport Commissioner; (aa) "Commissioner" means the person appointed by the State Government to be the Transport Commissioner and includes the Additional Transport Commissioner]; (b) "prescribed" means prescribed by this Act or by Rules made under this Act: 2 [(c) "tax" means a tax and surcharge imposed under this Act;] (d) "Taxation Officer" means an officer authorised by the 3 [State Government] to perform the duties and exercise the powers imposed or conferred upon a Taxation Officer by this Act, and 4 [(e) Words and expressions used but not defined in this Act and defined in Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (Central Act 59 of 1988) and Central Motor Vehicles Rules, 1989, shall have the meaning assigned to them in that Act and Rules as amended from time to time]. Inserted Raj 20 of 1982. Substituted by Raj 20 of 1982. Substituted by Raj 27 of 1957. Substituted by Raj 14 of 1990.
Rajasthan Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1951_Section 3--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) The 2 [State Government] may by notification in the 3 [Official Gazette] exempt either totally or partially any motor vehicles or class of motor vehicles from the payment of the 4 [tax, penalty or interest imposed or charged by or under the provisions of this Act or rules made there under: Provided that the interest or penalty or both shall be exempted only for the purposes of giving effect to the amnesty schemes of limited duration.] (2) Every notification issued under this section shall be laid before the House of the State Legislature at the session thereof next following, and shall be liable to be rescinded or modified by a resolution of that House and the rescission or modification so made, shall, after publication by notification in the 5 [Official Gazette] be deemed to have come into force.] Substituted by Raj 13 of 1956. Substituted by Raj 27 of 1957. Substituted by Raj 27 of 1957. Substituted by Rajasthan Act No.11 of 2000 for the expression "tax imposed by this Act". Substituted by Raj 27 of 1957.
Rajasthan Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1951_Section 4--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) Save as otherwise provided by this Act or by the Rules made there under or any other law for the time being in force, there shall be levied and collected on all motor vehicles used or kept for use in the State,- (a) a tax in respect of such vehicles which are not covered by clause (b), (c) or (d), at such rates as may be specified by the State Government by notification in official gazette which 2 [shall not exceed 10% of the cost] of the chassis/vehicle per annum: Provided that where the rates are not specified, on quarterly or monthly basis, by the State Government, by notification in the official gazette, and if the tax is permissible to be paid quarterly or monthly, the amount payable shall be equivalent to the one fourth or one twelfth respectively of the annual rate of tax; (b) a One Time Tax in the case of non transport vehicles at such rates as may be notified by the State Government by notification in the official gazette which shall not exceed 10% of the cost of the vehicle: Provided that in addition to One Time Tax there shall be paid by the owner or person having possession or control of a motor vehicle on which one time tax is payable, any tax or penalty as was payable under this Act for any period prior to the coming into force of the provisions of Chapter V of the Rajasthan Finance Act, 1997 (Rajasthan Act No.9 of 1997) at such rates as were applicable to such vehicles from time to time: 3 [Provided further than on every transfer of ownership of motor vehicle mentioned above, an additional one time tax shall be payable at such rates as may be notified by the State Government in the Official Gazette;] 4 [(c) a tax in respect of motor vehicles registered outside the State and using roads in Rajasthan under temporary permits, and in case of motor vehicle and chasis of motor vehicle temporarily registered and passing through the State using roads in Rajasthan, at such rates, as may be notified by the State Government in the Official Gazette which shall not exceed Rs.200/-per day per seat in case of passenger vehicles and shall not exceed Rs.250/-per thousand Kg. of Gross Vehicle Weight/Registered Laden Weight or part thereof for 30 days or part thereof in case of goods vehicles and shall not exceed Rs.5000/-in case of motor vehicle or motor vehicle chassis temporarily registered and passing through the State]; (d) a tax on dealers in, or manufacturers of motor vehicles in respect of such vehicles as are in their possession in the course of his business as such manufacturers or dealer under the authorisation of a trade certificate granted or deemed to be granted under the Motor Vehicle Rules for the time being in force in the State of Rajasthan, at such rates as may be specified by the State Government by notification in the official gazette which shall not exceed rupees ten thousand for every 50 vehicles or part thereof in respect of three or four wheeled vehicles; and shall not exceed Rs. 10,000/-for every 100 vehicles or part thereof in respect of two wheeled vehicles; and 5 [(e) a one time tax in the case of three wheeled passenger transport vehicles, with seating capacity up to 4 excluding driver, at such rates as may be notified by State Government in the Official Gazette, which shall not exceed 16% of the cost of the vehicle/chassis: Provided that in addition to one time tax, there shall be paid by the owner or person having possession or control of three wheeled passenger transport vehicle with seating capacity up to 4 excluding driver, any tax or penalty as was payable under this Act for any period prior to the coming into force of the provisions of the Finance Act, 2000 (Act No.11 of 2000) at such rates as were applicable to such vehicles from time to time: Provided further that the owner or person having possession or control of three wheeled passenger transport vehicle with seating capacity up to 4 excluding driver shall have option either to pay tax levied under clause (a) or one time tax levied under clause (e).] 6 [(2) A tax shall be payable under this section by the owner of motor vehicle except for the period during which the owner surrenders the certificate of registration to the taxation officer, in the prescribed manner, that the vehicle has remained out of use for such reasons as may be prescribed, or satisfies the taxation officer that vehicle has not been used due to following reasons:- (i) that the motor vehicle was restrained from plying by the competent court or authority: (ii) that the motor vehicle was involved in an accident and a report to this effect was made to the police and because of accident it remained out of use, (iii) that the motor vehicle was attached for the recovery of tax under the Rajasthan Land Revenue Act, 1956 (Act No. 15 of 1956) by the competent authority or attached under the warrant of attachment issued by the competent authority or court and during the period of attachment the vehicle did not remain in his possession: 7 [Provided that the period of such surrender or non-use shall not be less than one month and shall not be more than two months, unless extended by the Taxation Officer in the manner as may be prescribed:] 8 [Provided further that the owner or person having possession or control of three wheeled passenger transport vehicle with seating capacity up to 4 excluding driver shall have option either to pay tax levied under clause (a) or one time tax levied under clause (e).] Explanation -(1) The cost of the chassis/vehicle for the purposes of computation of tax shall include purchase price and such other elements as may be prescribed by the State Government. (2) For determining the vehicles kept in possession of a dealer or manufacturer, the number of vehicles declared by them likely to be in their possession or the vehicles sold by them during the preceding year, whichever is higher, shall be taken into consideration. Substituted by Rajasthan Act 9 of 1997 Substituted by Rajasthan Act No.11 of 2000. Inserted by Rajasthan Act No.11 of 2000. Substituted by Rajasthan Act No.11 of 2000 for the following clause (c):-"(c) a tax in respect of vehicles registered outside the State using roads in Rajasthan or under temporary permits, at such rates as may be notified by the State Government by notification in the official gazette which shall not exceed Rs.200/-per day per seat in case of passenger vehicles and shall not exceed Rs.250/-per thousand Kg. of GVW/RLW or part thereof for30 days or part thereof in case of goods vehicles:" Inserted by Rajasthan Act No.11 of 2000. Substituted by Rajasthan Act 8 of 1998. Proviso Substituted by Rajasthan Act 5 of 2001 for the following:-"Provided that the period of such surrender of the period of such non-use, as the case may be, shall be for a period of not less than one month:" Substituted by Rajasthan Act No.11 of 2000 for the following proviso:-"Provided further that if the vehicle is found plying after the certificate of registration has been surrendered, the owner shall pay the tax for the entire period during which the certificate of registration remained surrendered".
Rajasthan Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1951_Section 4-A--> State(s): Rajasthan 1 [x x x x] Omitted by Rajasthan9 of 1997.
Rajasthan Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1951_Section 4-B--> State(s): Rajasthan In addition to the tax levied under section 4 and subject to the rules as may be made by the State Government in this behalf, there shall be levied and paid to the State Government a special Road Tax on all transport vehicles 2 [except those three wheeled passenger vehicles with a seating capacity up to 4 excluding driver which have paid one time tax payable under clause (e) of sub-section (1) of section 4] at the rates as may be specified by notification in the official gazette, by the State Government which shall not exceed 3 [Rs.2,000/-] per day in respect of passenger vehicles and shall not exceed Rs.250/-per thousand Kg. of load carrying capacity or part thereof for thirty days in respect of goods vehicles of other States or for vehicles plying on temporary permits of this State, and 4 [not exceeding 5% of the cost] of the chassis/vehicle per month in respect of other vehicles: 5 [Provided further that where a motor vehicle is found plying after the surrender of the certificate of registration, the Special Road Tax on such vehicle shall be payable forthwith for the entire period for which such certificate of registration was surrendered, along with a penalty equal to five time the amount of Special Road Tax but no such tax or penalty shall be charged from empty vehicle going for repair or for test purposes.] Explanation -The cost of the chassis/vehicle for the purposes of computation of tax shall include purchase price and such other elements as may be prescribed by the State Government]. Substituted by Rajasthan9 of 1997. Inserted by Rajasthan Act No.11 of 2000. Substituted by Rajasthan Act 8 of 1998. Substituted by Rajasthan Act 8 of 1998. Inserted by Rajasthan Act No.11 of 2000.
Rajasthan Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1951_Section 4-C--> State(s): Rajasthan 1 [Omitted] Omitted by Rajasthan 9 of 1997.
Rajasthan Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1951_Section 5--> State(s): Rajasthan (l) Save as otherwise provided by or under this Act and subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), the tax leviable under section 4 and section 4-B shall be paid by every owner or by the person having possession or control or a motor vehicle in advance in the manner prescribed by the State Government: Provided that the State Government may, if satisfied that there are sufficient reasons for doing so, by notification in the official Gazette, extend whether prospectively or retrospectively the time limit for payment of tax in case of particular classes of vehicles or persons liable to pay tax under this Act. (2) Where the tax on any motor vehicle becomes payable otherwise than as one time tax payable by the non-transport vehicles 2 [or three wheeled passenger transport vehicles with seating capacity up to 4 excluding driver], for the first time after the commencement of a financial year, the tax payable shall be one twelfth of the annual rate for each calendar month or part thereof where annual rate is prescribed: Provided that where the tax under section 4-B on stage carriage other than those plying exclusively on city routes becomes payable for the first time after the commencement of any month, the tax payable shall be for the remaining period of that month on pro rata basis. (3) The tax payable under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 4 shall be payable- (a) Where the motor vehicle is purchased or brought into the State for use or is kept for use on or after the coming into force of the provisions of Chapter IX of the Rajasthan Finance Act, 1998 (Act No.8 of 1998), within thirty days of the date of such purchase or of being so brought or on the date of registration or assignment of such vehicle in the State, whichever is earlier; or (b) where the motor vehicle has been used or kept for use in the State before the coming into force of the provisions of Chapter IX of the Rajasthan Finance Act, 1998 (Act No.8 of 1998) within sixty days of such coming into force. 3 [(4) where a motor vehicle is found plying after the surrender of the certificate of registration, the tax levied under section 4 and section 4-B on such vehicle shall be payable forthwith by the owner or person having possession or control of the motor vehicle, for the entire period for which such certificate was surrendered, along with a penalty equal to five times the amount of tax but no such tax or penalty shall be charged from empty vehicle going for repairs or for test purposes].] Substituted by Raj .8 of 1998. Inserted by Raj .Act No. 11 of 2000. Substituted by Rajasthan Act No.11 of 2000 for the following:-"(4) Where a motor vehicle is found plying even after the surrender of the certificate of registration, the tax on such vehicle shall be payable forthwith for the entire period for which such certificate was surrendered."
Rajasthan Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1951_Section 6--> State(s): Rajasthan 3 [(1 Where the tax due in respect of a motor vehicle 4 [other than that referred to in sub-section (3) and (4)] is not paid within the period allowed, the defaulter shall be liable to pay in addition to the tax due, a penalty at such rate as may be prescribed by the State Government, by notification in the official gazette, which shall not exceed 5% per month of the amount of tax due for each month or part thereof from the date of expiry of the period allowed: 5 [Provided that the amount of penalty shall in no case be more than double the amount of tax due]. 6 [x x x] 7 [(2)] If the owner or any person having possession or control of a motor vehicle has deposited the penalty in addition to the tax for such late payment, no other proceedings shall be taken or continued in respect of such late payment.] 8 (3) Where a transport vehicle of other State, other than that referred to in sub-section (4), piles in Rajasthan without paying the tax leviable under this Act, the defaulter shall be liable to pay in addition to the tax, a penalty which shall not be less than four times of the amount of tax due. (4) Where a transport vehicle of other State piles in Rajasthan on National Permit with valid authorisation certificate but without paying full amount of tax leviable under this Act, the defaulter shall be liable to pay in addition to the tax due, a penalty which shall not be less than the amount of tax due.] Deleted by Rajasthan Act 15 of 1986, w.e.f. 1-4-1986. Substituted by Rajasthan Act 11 of 1972. Substituted by Rajasthan Act 8 of 1998. Inserted by Rajasthan Act 5 of 2001. Substituted by Rajasthan Act No.11 of 2000 for the following:-"Provided that the penalty shall in no case be less than rupees one hundred and more than double the amount of tax due:" The second proviso inserted by Rajasthan Act 12 of 1999, deleted by Rajasthan Act No.11 of 2000. The deleted proviso was as under:-"Provided further that where the amount of double the amount of tax due is less than rupees one hundred, then only such amount of double the tax shall be payable as penalty." Renumbered by Raj 15 of 1986 w.e.f. 1-4-86. Substituted Secs. (3) and (4) inserted by Rajasthan Act No. 5 of 2001.
Rajasthan Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1951_Section 6A--> State(s): Rajasthan If as a result of imposition of a tax or revision of rates made under any provision of this Act, a motor vehicle in respect of which tax has been paid becomes liable to higher amount of tax, the owner or any person having possession or control of the motor vehicle shall, within the time allowed for payment of tax for the following financial year or any quarteror month thereof, as the case may be, pay additional tax of a sum which is equal to the difference between the tax already paid and the higher amount of tax which becomes payable in respect of such vehicle for the complete month in which the tax is revised or the remaining months of the financial year or of any quarter thereof as the case may be. and the Taxation Officer shall not issue a fresh token in respect of such vehicle until such amount of tax has been paid. Inserted by Raj 11 of 1972 and as amended from time to time up to Rajasthan 5 of 1989.
Rajasthan Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1951_Section 7--> State(s): Rajasthan 1 [(1)] When any person who has paid the tax (other than one-time tax under [clause (b) or clause (e)] of sub-section (1) of section (4)] or installment of tax; proves to the satisfaction of the Taxation Officer that the motor vehicle in respect of which such tax or installment has been paid, has not been used for a continuous period of not less than three months since the tax or installment was last paid, he shall be entitled to the refund of an amount equal to 1/12th of the annual rate of the tax paid in respect of such vehicle for each complete month of the period for which such tax or installment has been paid. 2 [(1-A) When any person who has paid one-time tax under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 4 proves to the satisfaction of the Taxation Officer that the motor vehicle, in respect of which such tax has been paid, has been taken out of the State or has completely been destroyed, he shall be entitled t the refund of such tax on pro rata basis in the prescribed manner]. 3 [(2) The Taxation Officer may refund or adjust in the prescribed manner any amount paid in excess of the tax due.] Renumbered by Raj 11 of 1972 and as amended up to Rajasthan 15 of 1986. Inserted by Raj 15 of 1986 w.e.f. 1-4-86. Added by Raj 11 of 1972.
Rajasthan Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1951_Section 8--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) The owner or any person having possession or control of any motor vehicle shall make a declaration in respect of every motor vehicle in the prescribed form and shall deliver to the taxation officer within prescribed period every time, or whenever he becomes liable to pay tax, as may be specified in the notification published by the State Government in the official gazette, along with the receipt of payment of such tax in the prescribed manner. (2) Where owing to any alteration of the motor vehicle or otherwise, the owner or any person having possession or control of the vehicle liable to payment of tax at higher rates, such owner or any person having possession or control shall make within the prescribed period, an additional declaration in the prescribed form, showing the nature of the alteration made and stating reasons thereof, and shall deliver it to the taxation officer and shall pay to him the difference of tax for which he becomes liable to pay in respect of such vehicle. (3) Where the owner of the vehicle who becomes liable to make or deliver a declaration under the provisions of sub-section (1) or (2), fails to do so, the taxation officer on being satisfied that a default has been committed by the owner of the vehicle, shall impose a penalty at such rates as may be prescribed by the State Government which shall not exceed Rs.5/-per day]. Substituted by Rajasthan Act 8 of 1998.
Rajasthan Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1951_Section 8-A--> State(s): Rajasthan If the Taxation Officer is satisfied that tax has not been correctly paid, he shall, after giving the owner a reasonable opportunity of being heard, proceed to compute the amount of tax due and recover the same.] Inserted by Rajasthan Act 5 of 2001, which was omitted by Rajasthan 9 of 1997.
Rajasthan Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1951_Section 9--> State(s): Rajasthan Where any motor vehicle in respect of which the tax has been paid, is altered in such a manner as to cause the vehicle to become a vehicle in respect of which a higher rate of tax is payable, the 1 [owner or any person having possession or control], thereof shall be liable to pay an additional tax of a sum which is equal to the difference between the tax already paid in respect of such vehicle and the tax which is payable in respect of such vehicle after its being so altered. Substituted by Raj 11 of 1972.
Rajasthan Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1951_Section 10--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) The Taxation Officer shall grant and deliver to every person who pays to him the tax,- (a) in respect of any motor vehicle covered under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 4, a receipt specifying the particulars of tax paid and also a tax certificate in such form and containing such particulars as may be prescribed; or (b) in respect of a motor vehicle other than that covered by clause (a) above, a receipt as aforesaid and a token in such form and containing such particulars as may be prescribed: Provided that no token shall be issued in respect of a transport vehicle if the special read tax payable under section 4B and the outstanding dues and further demand created, if any, under the Rajasthan passengers and Goods Taxation Act, 1959 (Rajasthan Act 18 of 1959), as it stood before the Rajasthan Passengers and Goods Taxation (Repealing) Act, 1982 have not been paid. (2) No motor vehicle liable to tax under this Act shall be used or kept for use in Rajasthan unless the owner or nay person having possession or control thereof has obtained,- (a) in case of a vehicle covered under 2 [clause (b) and clause (e)] of sub-section (1) of section 4, a tax certificate which shall always be kept in such vehicle, or (b) in case of a vehicle other than covered under clause (a) above, a valid token which shall always be exhibited on such vehicle in the prescribed manner.] Substituted by Raj 15 of 1986 w.e.f. 1-4-86. Substituted by Rajasthan Act No.11 of 2000.
Rajasthan Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1951_Section 10-A--> State(s): Rajasthan Any owner of a motor vehicle who has paid the motor vehicle tax and special road tax in advance may apply to the Taxation Officer for grant of special token on payment of prescribed fee and the Taxation Officer shall issue the special token in such manner, as may be prescribed. Sections 10-A and 10-B Inserted by Rajasthan Act 5 of 2001.
Rajasthan Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1951_Section 10-B--> State(s): Rajasthan The work of grant of receipt, tax certificate, token, special token, etc., under this Act may be computerised in such manner, as may be prescribed. Such work may be entrusted to any agency and the cost incurred may be reasised from the owner of the vehicle in such manner, as may be prescribed.]
Rajasthan Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1951_Section 11--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) Whoever,- (a) as a registered owner or otherwise, has the possession or control of any motor vehicle used or kept for use in the State without having paid the amount of the tax or 2 [additional tax or special road tax], due in accordance with the provisions of this Act in respect of such vehicle; or (b) delivers a declaration or additional declaration wherein the particulars required by or under this Act, to be therein set forth, are not fully and truly stated; or (c) obstructs any officer in the exercise of the powers conferred by section 18 or fails to stop the motor vehicle when required so to do by such officer under section 17; shall on conviction, be punishable 3 [with fine, which shall not be less than twice the annual tax payable in respect of such vehicle but which may extend to five times of such annual tax.] (2) Whoever contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or any rules made there under, and no penalty is provided for such a contravention, shall on conviction, be punishable with fine which may extend to 4 [five hundred rupees], and in the event of such person having been previously convicted of an offence under this Act or rules made there under, with fine which may extend to 5 [one thousand rupees].] Substituted by Raj 11 of 1972. Substituted by Rajasthan Act 5 of 2001 for the words "additional tax". Substituted by Rajasthan Act 5 of 2001 for the words "with fine, which may extend to a sum equal to twice the annual tax payable in respect of such vehicle." Substituted by Rajasthan Act 5 of 2001 for the words "three hundred rupees". Substituted by Rajasthan Act 5 of 2001 for the words "six hundred rupees".
Rajasthan Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1951_Section 12--> State(s): Rajasthan Where an offence under section 11 has been committed, such offence may at any time before conviction, be compounded by the prescribed officer by accepting, by way of composition therefore, a sum of money not exceeding such amount as may be prescribed, together with the amount of the 1 [tax and penalty, if any,] which may be due from the person committing the offence. Such composition shall have the effect of discharging such person from all liability for the offence and no further proceedings shall be taken or continued against him in respect of the offence so compounded. Substituted by Rajasthan Act 5 of 2001 for the words "tax, if any,".
Rajasthan Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1951_Section 13--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) When any person without any reasonable cause fails or refuses to pay the tax, penalty or interest, the Taxation Officer may forward to the Collector of the District concerned, a certificate under his signature specifying the amount of tax, penalty or interest due from such person, and the Collector on receipt of such certificate shall proceed to recover such tax, penalty or interest as if it were an arrear of land revenue. (2) The tax, penalty or interest payable under this Act shall be first charge on the motor vehicle including its assessories, in respect whereof it is due]. Legislative changes.-The whole section before its substitution by Rajasthan Act No.11 of 2000, was as under:- "13.Recovery of tax-When any person without any reasonable cause fails or refuses to pay the tax, the Taxation Officer may forward to the Collector of the District concerned, a certificate over his signature specifying the amount of tax due from such person, and the Collector on receipt of such certificate shall proceed to recover such tax is if it were an arrear of land revenue". Substituted by Rajasthan Act No. 11 of 2000.
Rajasthan Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1951_Section 13A--> State(s): Rajasthan Without prejudice to the provisions of section 13, the Taxation Officer may, with the previous sanction of the 2 [Commissioner] proceed to recover the tax or penalty due under this Act, in the prescribed manner, by attachment and sale of the movable property of the person liable for the payment thereof: Provided that the Taxation Officer may grant installments on the prescribed terms and conditions in the specified class of cases. Inserted by Raj 11 of 1972. Substituted by Raj 20 of 1982 w.e.f. 1-10-82.
Rajasthan Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1951_Section 13B--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) If the tax leviable in respect of any motor vehicle remain unpaid by any person liable for the payment thereof, and such person, before having paid the tax, has transferred the ownership of such vehicle or has ceased to be in possession or control of such vehicle, the person to whom the ownership of the vehicle has been transferred or the person who has possession or control of such vehicle shall also be liable to pay the said tax 1 [as also penalty, if any, and/or interest levied by the taxation officer]. (2) Nothing contained in this section shall apply to a person who has obtained possession or control of such vehicle by purchase in a public auction, conducted by a Government Department to recover the arrears of tax or penalty or under the order of a competent court.] Added by Rajasthan Act 8 of 1998.
Rajasthan Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1951_Section 14--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) Any person aggrieved by an order relating to the 1 [determination] of recovery of tax may within a period of thirty days from the date of such order prefer an appeal to the 2 [appellate authority appointed by the State Government in this behalf]. (2) Every order in appeal passed by the 3 [said] 4 [appellate authority] shall be final: 5 [Provided that the Commissioner may on his own motion or on the application of a person aggrieved 6 [by the order of the appellate authority] made in the prescribed manner and filed within a period of 90 days, call for and examine the record of any proceeding under this Act and revise any such order and may reverse or vary the same: 7 [Provided further that no appeal shall be entertained unless it is accompanied by satisfactory proof of payment of 50% of the amount due, under the order against which appeal has been preferred, or such other amount as is admitted by the appellant to be due from him whichever is higher or of such instalment thereof, as might have become payable and further that the appellate authority shall not stay recovery of tax]. Provided also that if the recovery of tax or nay part thereof is stayed under the preceding proviso, the amount of such tax shall be recoverable with interest at such rate as may be prescribed on the amount ultimately found due and such interest shall be payable on such amount from the date the tax first became due.] Substituted by Raj 20 of 1982 w.e.f. 1-10-82. Substituted by Raj 15 of 1986. Substituted by Raj 13 of 1956. Substituted by Raj 15 of 1974. Substituted by Raj 20 of 1982 w.e.f. 1-10-82. Inserted by Rajasthan 8 of 1998. Substituted by Rajasthan Act 8 of 1998.
Rajasthan Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1951_Section 14A--> State(s): Rajasthan Notwithstanding anything contained in the Rajasthan Court Fees and Suits Valuation Act, 1961 (Rajasthan Act 23 of 1961), appeals, applications and other proceedings under this Act shall require Court fee Stamps of such value as may be prescribed.] Inserted by Raj 8 of 1969.
Rajasthan Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1951_Section 15--> State(s): Rajasthan No Court inferior to that of a Magistrate of the Second Class, shall try any offence punishable under this Act.
Rajasthan Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1951_Section 16--> State(s): Rajasthan The liability of a person to pay the tax shall not be questioned or determined otherwise than as provided in this Act or in rules made there under and no prosecution suit or other proceeding shall lie against any officer of the 1 [State Government] for anything in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act. Substituted by Raj 27 of 1957.
Rajasthan Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1951_Section 17--> State(s): Rajasthan 1 [(1)] Any police officer in uniform not below such rank, as may be prescribed and any officer of the Transport Department not below the rank of a Sub-Inspector 2 [and any officer of the Commercial Taxes Department not below the rank of an Inspector posted at the check posts controlled by the Commercial Taxes Department] may require the driver of any motor vehicle in any public place to stop the vehicle and cause it to remain stationary so long as may reasonably be necessary for the purpose of satisfying himself that the amount of the tax due in accordance with the provisions of this Act in respect of such vehicle has been paid. 3 [(2) Where any tax due in respect of any vehicle has not been paid, any officer referred to in sub-section (1), may seize and detain such vehicle and take or cause to be taken such steps as he may consider necessary for the safe custody of the vehicle until it is produced before the Taxation Officer of the area concerned within a reasonable time or the tax due in respect of the vehicle is paid: Provided that where the vehicle so seized is a non-transport vehicle, such officer may release the vehicle after obtaining a bond for a sum not exceeding Rs. 500/-from the driver or the 4 [owner or any person having possession or control of the vehicle, as the case may be, for depositing the tax within the period specified in the bond: Provided further that the provisions of sub-section (2) shall not apply to non-transport vehicles registered in Rajasthan.] 5 [(3) The transport vehicle seized under sub-section (2) shall not be released unless full tax due in respect of such a vehicle has been paid. (4) Where the vehicle has been seized or detained under sub-section (2), the owner or person incharge of the motor vehicle may apply to the Taxation Officer or any officer authorised by the State Government together with the relevant documents for the release of such vehicle and such officer shall, after the verification of the documents and on being satisfied that no tax, penalty and interest is due, by an order, release the vehicle.] Re-numbered by Raj 20 of 1966. Inserted by Raj 11 of 1972. Substituted by Raj 11 of 1972. Substituted by Raj 11 of 1972. Sub-sections (3) and (4) added by Rajasthan Act No. 5 of 2001.
Rajasthan Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1951_Section 18--> State(s): Rajasthan Any 2 [ x x x] officer of the Transport Department not below the rank of a Sub-Inspector may for the purposes of this Act, enter at any time between sun-rise and sun-set, any premises where he has reason to believe that a motor vehicle is kept, in contravention of the provisions of this Act. Substituted by Raj 11 of 1972. Deleted by Raj 11 of 1972.
Rajasthan Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1951_Section 19--> State(s): Rajasthan 1 [Omitted] Omitted by Rajasthan 9 of 1997.
Rajasthan Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1951_Section 20--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, it shall be lawful for the State Government to levy toll on motor vehicles and trailers drawn by such vehicles passing over any bridge or through any tunnel including an approach road thereto or any section of road or any by-pass,- (a) which is constructed, reconstructed, improved or repaired, as the case may be, after the commencement of the Rajasthan Motor Vehicles Taxation (Amendment) Act, 1994 (Rajasthan Act No. 12 of 1994) at the expense of the State Government or at the expense of any person or body or association of individuals whether incorporated or not or at the expense of both, that is to say, the State Government and any such person or body or association and the total capital outlay of such construction, reconstruction, improvement or repairs, as the case may be, is not less than ten lakhs of rupees; or (b) which in the opinion of the State Government is of special service to the public: at such rate and for such period as the State Government may from time to time, by notification in the official Gazette, declare: Provided that overall collection of toll for any bridge, road or tunnel under this section shall not exceed the aggregate amount of capital outlay and expenses of collection of toll. (2) The State Government may itself or through its agent collect the toll levied under sub-section (1) and, where such collection is made through its agent such agent or his servants shall be deemed to be persons empowered to collect tolls under this Act. (3) Where any additional road or a portion of a road or a by-pass or bridge or a tunnel, being the road, bridge or tunnel on or below the same stream, river or road or rail track, including any approach road thereto, is constructed as augmentation of the facility of the use of the existing bridge, tunnel or road, as the case may be, then, the network of such bridge or tunnel, including any approach road thereto, shall be deemed to be one single entity for the purpose of levy of toll. Explanation -For the purpose of this section, the expression "Capital outlay" shall include the anticipated cost of certain essential on-going or imminent works like improvements, strengthening, widening, structural repairs, maintenance and also interest on such outlay at such rate as the State Government may fix.] Substituted by Raj 12 of 1994.
Rajasthan Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1951_Section 21--> State(s): Rajasthan 1 [(1)] Not-withstanding anything to the contrary in any law for the time being in force in any part of 2 [the State of Rajasthan], it shall not be lawful for any local authority to levy any tax or toll in respect of any motor vehicle. 3 [(2) Nothing in this section shall affect the power of any local authority to impose, increase or recover any tax falling under entry 52 of list II in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution.] Re-numbered by Raj 12 of 1994. Substituted by Raj 27 of 1957. Inserted by Raj 12 of 1994. [15-4-1994].
Rajasthan Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1951_Section 22--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) The 2 [State Government] may, by notification in the 3 [Official Gazette] make rules for carrying in to effect the purposes of this Act. (2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, the 4 [State Government] may make rules for all or any of the following purposes, that is to say- (a) prescribing the manner and the form in which and the authority to which, applications for payment of tax under this Act, shall be presented; 5 [(aa) prescribing the manner in which the period of surrender of certificate of registration or the period of non-use of vehicle may be extended;] (b) prescribing the form of any certificate, declaration, 6 [return,] notice, receipt or token, and the particulars to be stated therein, and the manner of exhibiting a token on a motor vehicle: 7 [(bb) prescribing the fee on payment of which and prescribing the manner in which the special token shall be granted; (bbb) prescribing the manner in which the work of grant of receipt, certificate, token, special token etc. under this Act may be computerised and entrusted to any agency and cost incurred may be realised from the owner of the vehicle;] (c) prescribing the manner in which, and the fee on payment of which, a token granted under this Act may be transferred: (d) prescribing generally the authorities by whom and the manner in which any duty in respect of or incidental to the carrying into effect of the provisions of this Act may be performed; (e) regulating the method of 8 [determination], payment and recovery of tax; (f) regulating the manner in which exemption from and refunds of tax may be claimed and granted; 9 [(g) regulating the manner in which and prescribing the court fee on payment of which appeals, 10 [revision], applications and other proceedings under this Act may be instituted and heard]; (h) Providing for the exemption for a limited period from liability to taxation in respect of any motor vehicle brought in to Rajasthan by persons making only a temporary stay in 11 [the State of Rajasthan]; (i) any other matter which may be prescribed. Substituted by Raj 27 of 1957. Substituted by Raj 27 of 1957. Substituted by Raj 27 of 1957. Substituted by Raj 27 of 1957. Inserted by Rajasthan Act No. 5 of 2001. Inserted by Raj 20 of 1982 w.e.f. 1-10-82. Inserted by Rajasthan Act No. 5 of 2001. Substituted by Raj 20 of 1982 w.e.f. 1-10-82. Substituted by Raj 8 of 1969. Inserted by Raj 20 of 1982 w.e.f. 1-10-82. Substituted by Raj 27 of 1957. 
