Rajasthan Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 2010_Section Preamble--> State(s): Rajasthan An Act to amend the Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 2009. Be it enacted by the Rajasthan State Legislature in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of India, as follows:-
Rajasthan Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 2010_Section 1--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) This Act may be called the Rajasthan Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 2010. (2) It shall come into force on the date of its publication in the Official Gazette.
Rajasthan Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 2010_Section 2--> State(s): Rajasthan For the existing sub-clause (ii) of clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 6 of the Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 2009 (Act No. 18 of 2009), hereinafter referred to as the principal Act, the following shall be substituted, namely:- "(ii) six persons in case of Municipal Corporation, five persons in case of Municipal Council and four persons in case of Municipal Board, having special knowledge or experience in municipal administration, to be nominated by the State Government by notification in the Official Gazette:".
Rajasthan Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 2010_Section 3--> State(s): Rajasthan After the existing sub-section (1) of section 48 of the principal Act, the following new sub-section shall be added, namely:- "(1A) Where any resolution of a Municipality or of any of its committees is against the interest of the Municipality or inconsistent with the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, the Chairperson shall record his opinion on such resolution and refer the matter to the State Government for its decision and the decision of the State Government on such resolution shall be final and binding on the Municipality.".
Rajasthan Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 2010_Section 4--> State(s): Rajasthan For the existing section 238 of the principal Act, the following shall be substituted, namely:- "238. Provision of rain water harvesting. - (1) In every building constructed on a plot of land exceeding three hundred square metres in municipal area after the commencement of the Rajasthan Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 2010 (Act No. 19 of 2010), it shall be compulsory to install a rain water harvesting system of such type and specifications as may be prescribed by the State Government having regard to the area and use of the land and keep such system always in working condition: Provided that if the State Government, having regard to the ground water level in a particular area, is of the opinion that installation of rain water harvesting system in such area is not appropriate, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, exempt such area from the operation of the provisions of this section. (2) The Municipality shall not grant any permission under section 194 unless the person seeking permission makes provision for rain water harvesting system of the type and specifications prescribed under sub-section (1) in the maps required under that section and undertakes to install such system and furnishes security for the same to the satisfaction of the Municipality. (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 194 or any other provision of this Act, every owner of the building, for which rain water harvesting system is compulsory under the provisions of this section, shall, after completion of such building, obtain a completion certificate in the prescribed manner and no such building shall be occupied unless and until such certificate has been obtained. (4) The officer or authority authorized to issue completion certificate under sub-section (3) shall not issue such certificate unless he is satisfied that a rain water harvesting system of the type and specifications prescribed under sub-section (1) has been installed in the building and is operational. (5) Any development of land in a municipal area made or continued in contravention of the provisions of this section shall be deemed to be an unauthorized development for the purposes of this Act. (6) No permanent water connection from any public water supply system shall be permitted in a building, for which rain water harvesting system is compulsory under the provisions of this section, unless the owner or occupier thereof produces a completion certificate issued under sub-section (3). (7) Any person who contravenes any provision of this section shall, on conviction and without prejudice to any other action that may be taken against him under any other provision of this Act or any other law for the time being in force, be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to seven days or with fine which shall not be less than rupees twenty five thousand but which may extend to rupees one lakh or with both. Explanation.- For the purposes of this section, 'rain water harvesting system' means any structure or apparatus or both, including roof top structure and under ground tank, constructed or installed to collect rain water either for domestic use or for percolation into earth for the purpose of recharging ground water.
Rajasthan Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 2010_Section 5--> State(s): Rajasthan After section 238, amended as aforesaid, and before section 239 of the principal Act, the following new section shall be inserted, namely:- "238-A. Provision of parking space. - (1) In every building constructed in a municipal area after the commencement of the Rajasthan Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 2010 (Act No. 19 of 2010), it shall be compulsory to provide such parking space as may be prescribed by the State Government: Provided that the State Government may, having regard to the area of land and situation and use of building, exempt, by notification in the Official Gazette, any building or class of buildings from the provisions of this section. (2) The Municipality shall not grant any permission under section 194 unless the person seeking permission makes provision for parking space as prescribed under sub-section (1) in the maps required under that section and undertakes to provide such parking space and furnishes security for the same to the satisfaction of the Municipality. (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 194 or any other provision of this Act, every owner of the building, for which provision of parking space is compulsory under the provisions of this section, shall, after completion of such building, obtain a completion certificate in the prescribed manner and no such building shall be occupied unless and until such certificate has been obtained. (4) The officer or authority authorized to issue completion certificate under sub-section (3) shall not issue such certificate unless he is satisfied that parking space as prescribed under sub-section (1) has been provided in the building. (5) Any development of land in a municipal area made or continued in contravention of the provisions of this section shall be deemed to be an unauthorized development for the purposes of this Act. (6) No permanent water connection from any public water supply system shall be permitted in a building, for which provision of parking space is compulsory under the provisions of this section, unless the owner or occupier thereof produces a completion certificate issued under sub-section (3). (7) Any person who contravenes any provision of this section shall, on conviction and without prejudice to any other action that may be taken against him under any other provision of this Act or any other law for the time being in force, be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to seven days or with fine which shall not be less than rupees twenty five thousand but which may extend to rupees one lakh or with both.". Principal Secretary to the Government. 
