Rajasthan Municipalities (Second Amendment) Act, 2011_Section Preamble--> State(s): Rajasthan 1 An Act further to amend the Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 2009. Be it enacted by the Rajasthan State. Legislature in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India, as follows:- The following Act of the Rajasthan Legislature received the assent of the Governor on 21st day of September, 2011 and was published in the Rajasthan Government Gazette, Extraordinary, Part IV (A), dated 22nd September, 2011.
Rajasthan Municipalities (Second Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 1--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) This Act may be called the Rajasthan Municipalities (Second Amendment) Act, 2011. (2) This Act shall come into force at once except Sections 3 to 10 which shall be deemed to have come into force on and from 31st March, 2011.
Rajasthan Municipalities (Second Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 2--> State(s): Rajasthan In sub-clause (a) of clause (xiii) of Section 2 of the Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 2009 (Act No. 9 of 2009), hereinafter referred to as the principal Act, the existing expression "Chief Executive Officer-cum-Commissioner" shall be substituted by expression "Chief Executive Officer and Commissioner".
Rajasthan Municipalities (Second Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 3--> State(s): Rajasthan In clause (vii) of sub-section (9) of Section 49 of the principal Act, for the existing expression "the Chairperson", the expression "the Municipality" shall be substituted.
Rajasthan Municipalities (Second Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 4--> State(s): Rajasthan In sub-section (2) of Section 94 of the principal Act, the existing expression ", on the request of the State Government" shall be deleted.
Rajasthan Municipalities (Second Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 5--> State(s): Rajasthan In the principal Act, after the existing Section 99 and before the existing Section 100, the following new section shall be inserted, namely:- "99-A. Audit by Comptroller and Auditor General of India:- (1) The accounts of the Municipalities shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India in accordance with the provisions of the Comptroller and Auditor General's (Duties, Powers and Conditions of Service) Act, 1971 (Central Act No. 56 of 1971). (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the State Government shall also entrust the Comptroller and Auditor General of India with the technical guidance and supervision over the audit of the municipal accounts. (3) The State Government shall cause the audit report under the Rajasthan Local Fund Audit Act, 1954 (Act No. 28 of 1954) along with Annual Technical Inspection report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India on the technical guidance and supervision as referred to in sub-section (2) to be laid before the State Legislature.".
Rajasthan Municipalities (Second Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 6--> State(s): Rajasthan In clause (vii) of sub-section (3) of Section 182 of the principal Act, for the existing punctuation mark ":", appearing at the end, the expression ": or" shall be substituted and thereafter the following new clause shall be added, namely:- "(viii) from any existing permissible use of land to any other purposes, as the State Government may prescribe:".
Rajasthan Municipalities (Second Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 7--> State(s): Rajasthan In clause (d) of Sub-section (1) of Section 194 of the principal Act, for the existing punctuation mark",", appearing at the end, the expression "; or" shall be substituted and thereafter the following new clause shall be added, namely:- "(e) to erect or re-erect any tower or similar structure on a land or building.".
Rajasthan Municipalities (Second Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 8--> State(s): Rajasthan In sub-section (3) of Section 332 of the principal Act,- (i) the existing expression "Commissioner or an Executive Officer, as the case may be," shall be deleted; and (ii) for the existing expression "Mayor or President or Chairperson of the Municipal Corporation or Municipal Council or Municipal Board, as the case may be,", the expression "Municipality" shall be substituted.
Rajasthan Municipalities (Second Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 9--> State(s): Rajasthan In sub-section (2) of Section 333 of the principal Act, for the existing expression "Chief Executive Officer", the expression "Chief Municipal Officer" shall be substituted.
Rajasthan Municipalities (Second Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 10--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) The Rajasthan Municipalities (Amendment) Ordinance, 2011 (Ordinance No. 02 of 2011) is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, all actions taken or orders made under the principal Act as amended by the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been taken or made under the principal Act as amended by this Act. 
