Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section Preamble--> State(s): Rajasthan An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to Municipalities in the State of Rajasthan . Be it enacted by the Rajasthan State Legislature in the Tenth Year of the Republic of India, as follows:-
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 1--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) This Act may be called the Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959.1 . (2) It extends to the whole of the State of Rajasthan . (3) It shall come into force on such date2 as the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. Received the assent of the President on the 7th day of September, 1959 Came Into force on 17-10-1959 vide State Government Notification dated 15th October, 1959, Published in R.G. Gazette pt. IV-C (Ext.), dated the 15th October, 1959.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 2--> State(s): Rajasthan On this Act coming into force, the laws and enactments specified in the First Schedule appended to this Act shall be repealed: Provided that- (a) such repeal shall not affect the validity or invalidity of anything already done or suffered or any action already taken under any of the said laws or enactment or the rules, bye-laws and regulations there under; and (b) all municipal boards, corporations, councils, town boards or other municipal authorities established under any of the said laws or enactments shall be deemed to be municipal boards established under this Act and all municipalities constituted, members nominated, appointed or elected, committees formed, limits defined, appointments, rules, orders and bye-laws made, notifications and notices issued, taxes imposed, contracts entered into and suits and other proceedings instituted under the said laws or enactments or under any laws or enactments thereby repealed shall, so far as may be, be deemed, unless the State Government directs otherwise, to have been respectively constituted, nominated, appointed or elected, formed, defined, made, issued, imposed, entered into and instituted under this Act.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 3--> State(s): Rajasthan In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- (1) 'annual letting value' means the annual rent for which any building or land, exclusive of furniture or machinery contained or situated therein or thereon, might reasonably be expected to let from year to year; 1 [(1-A) 'backward classes' for the purpose of this Act, means such backward classes of citizens other than the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes as may be specified by the State Government from time to time;] (2) 'Board' means a municipal board established or deemed to be established under this At and includes in any case where a power is expressed as being conferred or a duty as being imposed on a board, a committee appointed by a board and any member, officer or servant of a board authorised or required by or under this Act to exercise the power or perform the duty; (3) 'building' means a house, hut, shed or enclosure, whether used as a human dwelling or for any other purpose, and includes walls, rooms, passages, verandahs, fixed platforms, plinths, projections, door-steps, staircases of whatsoever material constructed, but does not include a tent or other such portable and merely temporary shelter; (4) 'bye-law' means a bye-law made in exercise of a power conferred by this Act; (4-A) 'Chairperson' shall mean Chairman in case of municipal Board, President in case of municipal Council and Mayor in case of Municipal Corporation.2 3 [(4-AA) 'Chief Electoral Officer' means the officer appointed under section 19-A;] (5) 'city' means a municipality having a population 4 [of more than one lakh inhabitants] 5 [and includes a smaller urban area or a larger urban area]; (6) 'clear days', used with reference to the period of notice under any provision of this Act, includes Sundays and other holidays but does not include the date of receipt of such notice by the person to whom it is addressed or the date specified in the notice. 6 [(6-A) 'Collector' includes an Additional Collector. (7) 'Compound' means land which is the appurtenance of a building or the common appurtenance of several buildings; 7 [(7-A) 'Corporation' means a municipal Corporation established or deemed to be established under this Act, and includes, in any case where a power is expressed as being conferred or a duty as being imposed on a corporation, a committee appointed by such corporation and any corporator, officer or servant of such corporation authorised or required by or under this Act to exercise a power or to perform a duty and, "corporator" means any person, who is lawfully a member of a corporation; (8) 'council' means a municipal council established or deemed to be established under this Act in a city and includes, in any case where a power is expressed as being conferred or a duty as being imposed on a council, a committee appointed by a council and any councillor, officer or servant of a council authorised or required by or under this Act to exercise the power or perform the duty, and 'councilor' means any person who is lawfully a member of a council. 8 [Explanation I]-References in any provisions of this Act other than clause (2) and (15) of this section, 9 [section 7, section 8], sub-sections (1),(2) and (3) of section 65, section 73, section 308, section 310 and section 311 to a board or municipal board or to a member, officer or servant of a board or a municipal board or to the Chairman, vice-Chairman or executive officer of a board or a municipal board shall, in the case of a city, be construed as being references respectively to a council or a municipal council or to a councillor, officer or servant of a council or a municipal councillor to the president, vice-president or municipal commissioner of a council or a municipal council unless such construction is repugnant to the subject or context; 10 [Explanation II-References in any provision of this Act, including those construed in Explanation I as being references, to a council or a municipal council or to a councillor, officer or servant of a council or a municipal council or to the president, vice-president or municipal commissioner of a council or a municipal council shall, in the case of a city where a municipal Corporation is established under this Act, be construed as being references respectively to such corporation or to a corporator, officer or servant of such corporation or to the mayor, deputy mayor or Commissioner of such corporation unless such construction is repugnant to the subject or context. ] (9) 'dangerous disease' means cholera, plague, small-pox and any epidemic, epidemic or infections disease by which the life of man is endangered; 11 [(9-A) 'Director' means the director of local bodies appointed under section 282A or the person holding office with that designation under the State Government; ] (10) 'drain' includes a sewer, pipe, ditch, channel or any other device for carrying soil age, sewage and polluted water, rainwater or sub-soil water together with pail depots, traps, sinks, cisterns, flush tanks, and other fittings appertaining thereto; (10A) 'Finance Commission' means the Finance Commission constituted under Article 2431 of the Constitution of India;12 (11) 'High Court' means the High Court for the State of Rajasthan ; (12) 'inhabitant', used with reference to a local area, means any person ordinarily residing or carrying on business or owning or occupying immovable property therein; (13) 'land' includes land which is built upon or covered with water; 13 [(13A) 'latest census figures' mean the figures as ascertained at the last preceding census of which the relevant figures have been published; (14) 'lodging house' includes a collection of buildings, or a building, or part of a building used for the accommodation of pilgrims and travelers; (15) 'member' means any person who is lawfully a member of a board; 14 [(15-A) 'municipal area' means the territorial area of a municipality; ] 15 [(16) 'municipality', that is to say, nagarpalika means an institution (by whatever name called) of self-government for the urban areas, in existence at the time of commencement of, or constituted in accordance with, the provisions of, the Act 16 [x x x]; (16A) 17 [x x x] (17) 'nuisance' includes any act, omission, place or thing which causes or is likely to cause injury, danger, annoyance or offence to the sense of sight, smell or hearing or which is or may be dangerous to life or injurious to health or property; (18) 'occupier' includes an owner in actual occupation of his own land or building any any person for the time being paying or liable to pay to the owner of any land or building the rent or any portion of the rent payable in respect thereof; and includes a hotel keeper, a lodging house keeper, and any owner whose premises are let to more than one tenant; (19) 'officer of the board' means a person holding for the time being an office created or continued by or under this Act but shall not include a member of the board or of a committee as such; (20) 'official year' means the year commencing on the first day of April; (21) 'owner' includes a person for the time being receiving or entitled to receive the rent or a part of the rent of any land or building whether on his own account or as agent or trustee for any other person or for any society or for any religious or charitable purpose or as receiver appointed by or under the order of a court or who would so receive the rent if such land or building were let to a tenant; 18 [(22) 'population', used with reference to any local area, means the population of such local area as ascertained at the last preceding census of which the relevant figures have been published. ] (23) 'prescribed' means prescribed by this Act or by rules, orders or bye-laws made thereunder; (24) 'public place' means a space, not being private property, which is open to the use or enjoyment of the public whether such space is vested in the board or not; (25) 'public securities' means- (a) securities of the Government of Rajasthan or of the Central or any State Government in India; and (b) a security expressly authorised by any order which the State Government makes in this behalf; (26) 'public street' means any street- (a) over which the public have a right or way, or (b) which has heretofore been levelled, paved, metalled, channeled, sewered or repaired out of municipal or other public funds, or (c) which, under any provision of this Act, becomes a public street; (27) 'rule' means a rule made in exercise of a power conferred by this Act; (28) 'salaried servant of the Government' does not include a retired servant of Government in receipt of a pension or a person in receipt of a salary from Government who is not a full time servant of Government; (29) 'Scheduled Caste' means any of the castes specified in the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950; (30) 'Scheduled Tribe' means any of the tribes specified in the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950; (31) 'State' means the State of Rajasthan as formed by section 10 of the State Reorganisation Act, 1956 (Central Act 37 of 1956); 19 [(31A) 'State Election Commission' means the State Election Commission referred to in Article 243K of the Constitution of India; ] (32) 'street' means any road, bridge, foot-way, lane, square, court, alley or passage accessible, whether permanently or temporarily, to the public or any portion of the public, whether a thoroughfare or not, and includes on either side- (i) the drain or gutters and the land up to the defined boundary, notwithstanding the projection over such land of any verandah or other super-structure, (ii) every space, notwithstanding that it may be private property, or partly or wholly obstructed by any gate, post, chair of other barrier, if it is used by any person, whether or not occupying any abutting property, as a means of access to or from any public place or thoroughfare; (33) 'tax' includes any toll, rate, cess, fee or other impost leviable under this Act; 20 [(33A) 'a transitional area', "a smaller urban area" or "a larger urban area" means an area specified under clause (2) of Article 243Q of the Constitution of India; ] (34) 'vehicle' includes a bicycle, a tricycle, an auto-motor car and every wheeled conveyance which is used or is capable of being used on a public street; 21 [(34A) Village' means a village specified under clause (g) of Article 243 of the Constitution of India; ] 22 [(34B) Ward' means a ward formed under section 14; ] 23 [(34C) Wards Committee' means the wards committee referred to in section 73A; ] (35) 'water works' includes all lakes, tanks streams cisterns, springs, pumps, wells, reservoirs, aqueducts, cuts, sluices, main-pipes, culverts, engines, hydrauts, standpipes, conduits, and a machinery, lands, buildings, bridges and things for supplying or used for supplying water; (36) 'whole number' or 'total number' when used with reference to the members of a board, means the total number of members holding office at the time. Inserted by Rajasthan Act 19 of 1994. Inserted by Rajasthan Act No. 22 of 1994. Originally Inserted by 32 1992 as (4A), renumbered by 19 of 1994 as (4AA). Substituted by Rajasthan 32 of 1992. Inserted by Rajasthan 19 of 1994. Inserted w.e.f.31-7-1961 by Rajasthan Act No. 26 of 1961. Inserted by Rajasthan Act No.32 of 1992. Renumbered by Rajasthan Act No.32 of 1992. Inserted by Rajasthan 19 of 1994. New Explanation II Inserted by 32/92. Inserted by Rajasthan Act 19 of 1994. Inserted by Rajasthan Act 19 of 1994. Inserted by Rajasthan Act 19 of 1994. Inserted by Rajasthan Act No.2 of 1990. Substituted by Rajasthan 2 of 1990. Deleted by Rajasthan 32 of 1992. Inserted by Rajasthan 2 of 1990 and deleted by Rajasthan 32 of 1992. Substituted by Rajasthan Act of 1994. Inserted by Rajasthan Act 19 of 1994. Inserted by Rajasthan Act 19 of 1994. Inserted by Rajasthan Act 19 of 1994. Inserted by Rajasthan Act 19 of 1994. Inserted by Rajasthan Act 19 of 1994.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 4--> State(s): Rajasthan 1 [(1) The State Government may, by notification published in the Official Gazette, declare any local area not included within the limits of a municipality to be a municipality or include any such area in a municipality or exclude any local area in a municipality or from otherwise alter the limits of any municipality and when- (a) any local area is declared or included in a municipality, or (b) any local area is excluded from a municipality, or (c) the limits of a municipality are otherwise altered, by amalgamation of one municipality into two or more municipalities, or (d) any local area ceases to be a municipality, the State Government may, notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any other law for the time being in force, by an order published in the Official Gazette, provide as follows, namely:- (i) in a case falling under clause (a), the election of the members for the area or the additional area shall be held within a period of six months from the appointed day; (ii) in a case falling under clause (b), order the removal of the members who in the opinion of the State Government represent the area excluded from the municipality; (iii) in a case falling under clause (c), the municipality shall stand dissolved on the appointed day and a new municipality shall be constituted in accordance with the provisions of this Act. The duration of the reconstituted municipality shall be the same as provided in section 11; (iv) in a case falling under clause (d), the municipality shall be dissolved: 2 [Provided that such notification for inclusion of a local area comprising a revenue village or part thereof within the municipal area of a municipality shall not be necessary to be issued in such cases in which such area has been declared as included or deemed to have been included or existing within the municipal area of a municipality with retrospective effect by or under the provisions of this Act notwithstanding the fact that no such notification for inclusion of such local area was ever issued or published in the Official Gazette by following the procedure provided under this Act and the area so declared to be part of the municipal area of the municipality shall be and shall always be deemed to have been included and existing within the municipal area of such municipality as if the necessary procedure provided by this Act has been followed in all respects: Provided further that in respect of such local areas as are declared to be included and existing within the municipal area of municipality with retrospective effect as mentioned in the preceding proviso, it shall not be necessary and shall never be deemed necessary to observe and follow the procedure as provided in any law relating to Panchayats for the time being in force for excluding such area from the whole or part of any Panchayat circle of a panchayat with retrospective effect notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any law relating to panchayats for the time being in force or in any judgment, decree, order or direction of any court.] Explanation - In this sub-section, "appointed date" means the day from which a change referred to in any of the clauses (a) to (d) takes place]. (2) 3 [x x x] (3) It shall be the duty of the municipal board in every municipality already existing and of every board newly established under this Act and of every board who local limits are altered as aforesaid to cause at its own cost, to be erected or set up, and thereafter to maintain at its own cost, substantial boundary marks of such description and in such positions as shall be approved by the Collector or any officer authorised by him in this behalf, defining the limits or altered the limits of the municipality subject to its authority, as set forth in the notification. (4) When any local area ceases to be a municipality, the board established therein shall cease to exist, and the balance of the municipal fund and other property and rights vesting in such board shall, subject to all charges and liabilities affecting the same, vest in the State Government and the proceeds thereof, if any, shall be expended under the orders of the State Government for the benefit of the local area in which such board had jurisdiction. (5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (4), when any local area ceases to be a municipality and is included within the local limits of the jurisdiction of some other local authority, the municipal fund and other property and rights vesting in the board shall vest in such other local authority and the liabilities of the board shall be the liabilities of such other local authority. (6) When any local area is excluded from a municipality and included in another municipality such portion of the municipal fund and other property vested in the board of the first mentioned municipality shall vest in, and such portion of the liabilities thereof shall be the liabilities of, the board of the other municipality as the State Government may, after consulting the boards of both municipalities, declare by notification in the Official Gazette; provided that the provisions of this sub- section shall not apply in any case where the circumstances, in the opinion of the State Government, render undesirable the transfer of any portion of the municipal fund and properties or liabilities. (7) When any local area is included in a municipality all rules and bye-laws made, orders, directions, 4 [notifications] and notices issued and powers conferred and in force throughout such municipality at the time when the said area is so included, shall apply thereto, unless the State Government otherwise directs, from the date of such inclusion. 5 [(8) When an area comprised in a village is specified as, or when any area is excluded from the village and included in, a municipal area then with effect from the date on which such area is so specified or is so included the following consequences shall ensue, namely:- (a) such area shall cease to be a 6 [village]; (b) 7 [8 [until elections are held under sub-section (1)] or the term 9 [x x x] of the Board expires under this Act, whichever is earlier], the Sarpanch, Up-Sarpanch and the member or members representing the area of the 10 [village] so included in or declared as a municipality shall be deemed to be the additional members of the municipality in which such area of the 11 [village] is included or the Chairman, Vice-chairman and the members respectively of the municipality declared for such area, as the case may be; (c) the whole of the assets vesting in, and of the liabilities subsisting against the panchayat so declared to be a municipality or in case where only a part or whole of a 12 [village] is so included in a municipality such portion of the said assets and liabilities as the State Government may direct, shall devolve upon the municipality declared for such area or upon the municipality in which such order of the 13 [village] is so included; (d) until new rules, notifications, orders and byelaws are made or issued under this Act, the rules, notifications, orders and byelaws applicable to the municipality in which any such area is included shall continue to apply to the area so included; (e) the municipality so established by the inclusion of any area of a 14 [village] therein or by the declaration of a 15 [village] as a municipality, shall levy or continue to levy such of the taxes as or lawfully imposed under the Act; (f) any such area shall cease to be subject to all rules, notifications, orders and byelaws made under the Rajasthan Panchayat Act, 1953 (Rajasthan Act No.21 of 1953); and (g) the municipality in which such area is included or the municipality declared for such area shall exercise jurisdiction over such area and the Panchayat established for such area shall cease to function therein. (9) For the purpose of facilitating the inclusion of any area of a 16 [village] in a municipality or of the declaration of any such area as a municipality, the State Government may, by order in writing give such directions, as may appear to it to be necessary. (10) Save as otherwise provided in this section its provisions shall have effect notwithstanding anything contained in this Act in the Rajasthan Panchayat Act, 1953 (Rajasthan Act 21 of 1953) or any other law for the time being in force.] Substituted and deemed always to have been substituted by Rajasthan Act 19 of 1994. Inserted and deemed always to have been inserted by Rajasthan Act No.4 of 1996. Deleted by Rajasthan Act 19 of 1994. Inserted by Rajasthan Act No.2 of 1990. Sub-sections (8), (9) & (10) Inserted by Rajasthan Act 21 of 1974. Substituted by Rajasthan 19 of 1994 Substituted by Rajasthan 19 of 1987. Substituted by Rajasthan 19 of 1994 Deleted by Rajasthan 19 of 1994. Substituted by Rajasthan 19 of 1994 Substituted by Rajasthan 19 of 1994 Substituted by Rajasthan 19 of 1994 Substituted by Rajasthan Act 19 of 1994. Substituted by Rajasthan Act 19 of 1994. Substituted by Rajasthan Act 19 of 1994. Substituted by Rajasthan Act of 1994.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 4A--> State(s): Rajasthan It is declared that the local areas comprising revenue villages Ummedganj and Rajpura of Tehsil Ladpura in District Kota shall be included and shall be deemed always to have been included and existed and continued to exist within the municipal areas of Kota municipality and shall hereinafter continue to exist within the municipal areas of Kota municipality for all intents and purposes and all other matters connected therewith and incidental thereto, notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained, in any provisions of this Act or any law relating to Panchayats for the time being in force providing for exclusion of whole or part of any local area from the Panchayat circle of panchayat or, in any judgment, decree, order or direction of any court. Ss.4A and 4B Inserted by Rajasthan Act No. 4 of 1996.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 4B--> State(s): Rajasthan It is declared that revenue Khasra Nos. 20, 21 and 1082 forming part of local area of revenue village Khetari. Tehsil Khetari, District Jhunjhunu shall be included and shall be deemed always to have been included and existed and continued to exist within the municipal area of Khetari Municipality and shall continue to exist within the municipal area of Khetari Municipality for all intents and purposes and all other matters connected therewith and incidental thereto, notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any provision of this Act or in any law relating to Panchayats or in any judgment, decree, order or direction of any court.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 5--> State(s): Rajasthan 1 [x x x] Previous provision-Section 5, before being omitted by Rajasthan Act 19 of 1994, w.e.f. 28-5-1994. was as under:- "5. What local area may be declared to be a Municipality-(1) Any local area which comprises- (a) a city or a town or two or more neighbouring towns with or without any village, suburb or land adjoining thereto, or (b) a village or suburb or two or more neighbouring villages and suburbs, or (c) the whole or any part of a Panchayat Circle as defined under the Rajasthan Panchayat Act, 1953 (Rajasthan Act No. XXI of 1953) may be declared a municipality: Provided that except for exceptional reasons, which shall be clearly set forth in the proclamation under section 6 and in the notification issued under section 4, it shall not be lawful- (i) to include any town or suburb in a municipality with any other town or suburb from which it is separated by more than one mile of land unoccupied by houses; or (ii) to constitute any area, of which the population is less than eight thousand inhabitants, to be a municipality. (2) When two or more places bearing different names are constituted to be one municipality, the name of the municipality shall be determined by the State Government." Omitted by Rajasthan Act 19 of 1994.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 6--> State(s): Rajasthan 1 [x x x] Previous provision-Section 6, before being omitted by Rajasthan Act 19 of 1994, w.e.f. 28-5-1994, was as under:- "6. Procedure preliminary to notification under section 4 - (1) Not less than thirty days before the issue of any notification under section 4, the State Government shall cause to be published in the Official Gazette, and to be posted in conspicuous spots or proclaimed by beat of drum in the area concerned, a proclamation announcing that it is proposed to constitute such local area to be a municipality, or to include or exclude it in or from any municipality, or to alter the limits of any municipality in a specified manner or to declare that such local area shall cease to be a municipality, as the case may be, and requiring all persons who entertain any objection to the said proposal to submit the same, with reasons therefor in writing to the State Government within thirty days from the date of the said proclamation. (2) No notification under section 4 shall be issued by the State Government, unless the objections, if any, so submitted are in its opinion insufficient or invalid." Omitted by Rajasthan Act 19 of 1994.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 7--> State(s): Rajasthan In every transitional area, there shall be established a municipal board and every such board shall be a body corporate by the name of the municipal board of the place by reference to which the municipality is known and shall have perpetual succession and a common seal and may sue or be sued in its corporate name: Provided that a Board under this section may not be constituted in such urban area or part thereof as the Governor may, having regard to the size of the area and the municipal services being provided or proposed to be provided by an industrial establishment in that area and such other factors as he may deem fit, by notification, specify to be an industrial township. Substituted by Rajasthan Act of 1994.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 8--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) In every smaller urban area, there shall be established a municipal council and every such council shall be a body corporate by the name of the municipal council of the city by reference to which the municipality is known and shall have perpetual succession and a common seal and may sue and be sued in its corporate name. (2) In every larger urban area, there shall be a municipal Corporation and every such Corporation shall be a body corporate by the name of the municipal Corporation of the city by reference to which the municipality is known and shall have perpetual succession and a common seal and may sue and be sued in its corporate name: Provided that a municipal council or a municipal Corporation under this section may not be constituted in such urban area or part thereof as the Governor may, having regard to the size of the area and the municipal services being provided or proposed to be provided by an industrial establishment in that area and such other factors as he may deem fit, by notification, specify to be an industrial township]. Substituted by Rajasthan Act of 1994.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 9--> State(s): Rajasthan 1 [(1) Subject to the provisions contained in the succeeding sub-sections, but save as provided in the following provisions of this sub-section, all seats in a municipality shall be filled by persons chosen by direct election from the territorial constituencies known as wards, the number of such seats, not being less than thirteen, being fixed by the State Government from time to time by notification in the Official Gazette:- 2 [(a) the following shall be represented on the board, council or corporation, as the case may be, viz:- (i) a member of the Rajasthan Legislative Assembly representing a constituency which comprises wholly or partly the area of a municipality; and (ii) three persons or ten percent of the number of elected members of the municipality, whichever is less, having special knowledge or experience in municipal administration, to be nominated by the State Government by notification in the Official Gazette: Provided that- (i) the provisions contained in section 26 and section 59 of this Act shall be applicable to the persons to be nominated or nominated under sub-clause (ii); (ii) the State Government shall have power to withdraw a member nominated under sub-clause (ii) at any time; (iii) the term of co-opted members, if any, who were co-opted and are continuing as such on the date of commencement of the Rajasthan Municipalities (Second Amendment) Act, 2000 (Act No.22 of 2000) shall come to an end upon such commencement: Provided further that a member referred to in sub clause (ii) shall not have the right to vote in the meetings of a board, council or corporation as the case may be;] (b) a member of the House of the People representing a constituency which comprises wholly or partly the area of a municipality with a municipal council or as the case may be, a municipal Corporation shall be represented on the Council or Corporation of such municipality: 3 [Provided that a member referred to in sub-clause (i) of clause (a) shall have a right to vote in the meetings of a Board, Council or Corporation and a member referred to in clause (b) shall have a right to vote in the meetings of a Council or Corporation; ] (1A) Upon the completion of each census after the establishment of the Board, the number of seats shall be re-determined by the State Government by notification in the Official Gazette or the basis of the population of the municipal area within the territorial jurisdiction of the board as ascertained at the latest census: Provided that the determination of seats as aforesaid shall not affect the then composition of the board until the expiry of the duration of the board.] (2) In so fixing the total number of seats for a Board, the State Government shall specify the number respectively of general seats and of seats reserved 4 [for women and] for members of the Scheduled Castes or for members of the Scheduled Tribes or for both 5 [or persons belonging to backward classes] as the State Government may in each case determine. 6 [(3) The number of seats reserved for Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes shall, in relation to the total number of seats fixed for a Board, bear the same proportion as the population of the 7 [Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes in the municipality] bears to the total population thereof. 8 [(3A) The percentage of seats reserved for Backward Classes shall be such as the percentage of the combined population of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in relation to the total population of the municipality falls short of fifty: ] Provided that the percentage of seat so reserved for Backward Classes shall not exceed 9 [twenty one]: Provided further that at least one seat shall be reserved for Backward Classes in every municipality where the percentage of the combined population of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in relation to the total population in the municipality does not exceed seventy]. 10 [(3B) One-third of the seats reserved for the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes or the Backward Classes shall be reserved for the women belonging to such Castes, Tribes or, as the case may be, classes. (3C) One third [including the number of seats reserved under sub-section (3B)] of the total number of seats shall be reserved for women. (3D) The reservation of seats for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and Backward Classes under sub-sections (2) and (3A) and (3B) shall cease to have effect on the expiration of the period specified in article 334 of the Constitution of India.] (4) All the seats fixed for a Board, general as well as reserved, shall be filled up 11 [by direct election from the wards in municipal area and such election shall be held] in the 12 [prescribed manner], 13 [Explanation - If a fraction forms part of the number of seats computed under this section, the number of seats shall be increased to the next higher number in case the fraction consists of half or more of a seat and the fraction shall be ignored in case it consists of less than half of a seat. ] (5) 14 [x x x] Substituted by Rajasthan Act 19 of 1994. Cl. (a) Substituted by Rajasthan Act 22 of 2000 [22-7-2000]. Inserted by Rajasthan Act 22 of 2000 [22-7-2000]. Inserted by Rajasthan Act 19 of 1994. Inserted by Rajasthan Act 19 of 1994. As further amended by Rajasthan Act 19 of 1994. Substituted by Rajasthan Act 21 of 1974. Inserted first by Rajasthan Act 2 of 1990. Substituted by Rajasthan Act 19 of 1994 and again subs, by 22 of 1994. Substituted by Rajasthan Act No.5 of 2000. w.r.e.f.25-10-1999]. [(3B), (3C) and (3D) Inserted by Rajasthan Act 19 of 1994. Substituted by Rajasthan Act 19 of 1994. Substituted by Rajasthan Act 22 of 2000 [22-7-2000] for the expression "manner provided for by and in the order made under section 29" Inserted by Rajasthan Act 19 of 1994. Deleted by Rajasthan Act 2 of 1990.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 10--> State(s): Rajasthan 1 [x x x] Deleted by Rajasthan Act 19 of 1994.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 11--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) Except as provided in section 295, every board shall continue for 1 [five] years from the date of the first meeting thereof 2 [and no longer]. 3 [x x x] 4 [(2) A board constituted upon the dissolution of board before the expiration of its duration shall continue only for the remainder of the period for which the dissolved board would have continued under sub-section (1).] 5 [Explanation-For the purposes of this section, the expression "first meeting" means the meeting of the elected and co-opted members of the board held immediately after the general elections in which the Chairman is elected.] Substituted for "three" by Rajasthan Act 2 of 1990. Inserted by Rajasthan Act 19 of 1994. Provisos omitted by Rajasthan Act 19 of 1994. Substituted by Rajasthan Act 19 of 1994. Added by Rajasthan Act No. 10 of 1978.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 12--> State(s): Rajasthan Except as in this Act otherwise expressly provided, the municipal Government of a municipality shall vest in the municipal board which shall stand charged with the duty of carrying out the provisions of this Act subject to the limitations and restrictions specified therein.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 12A--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) The superintendence, direction and control of the preparation of electoral rolls for, and the conduct of, all elections to the board shall be vested in the State Election Commission. (2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, an election shall be held in accordance with the rules or orders made by the State Government in that behalf. (3) The State Government shall, when so requested by the State Election Commission, make available to that Commission such staff which the State Government considers necessary for discharge of the functions conferred on the State Election Commission by sub-section (1). Inserted by Rajasthan Act 19 of 1994.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 12B--> State(s): Rajasthan The functions of the State Election Commission under this Act or the rules or orders issued thereunder, may, subject to such general or special directions, if any, as may be given by the State Election Commission in this behalf, be performed also by a Deputy Election Commissioner, if any, or by the Secretary to the State Election Commission. Inserted by Rajasthan Act 19 of 1994.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 13--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) For purposes of elections to a board, a municipality shall be divided into 1 [such number of wards as is equal to the total number of seats] fixed for the board under 2 [clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 9. (2) The representation of each ward shall be on the basis of population of that wards and shall, as far as possible, be in the same proportion as the total number of seats for the municipality bear to its population. 3 [(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the division of wards for the purposes of holding elections of Municipal Board or Municipal Council 4 [before the release of final returns of 1991 census] shall be made by the State Government on the basis of latest Assembly Electoral Rolls. Substituted by Rajasthan Act No.21 of 1974. Substituted by Rajasthan Act 19 of 1994. Added by Rajasthan Act No.3 of 1982. Substituted by Rajasthan Act No.4 of 1991.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 14--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) The State Government shall by order determine:- (a) the wards in which each municipality shall be divided for purpose of elections to the board; (b) the extent of each ward; (c) the number of seats, if any, reserved for members of the Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes as the case may be 1 [and for women members of such castes and tribes and for members of backward classes and women members thereof]; and (d) the number of wards for women candidates.2 3 [(1A) The seats reserved for Scheduled Castes or, as the case may be, for Scheduled Tribes and for Backward Classes and for women may be allotted by rotation to different wards in such manner as 4 [may be prescribed]. 5 [(1B) The State Government shall carry out the determination of the boundaries of the wards and allocation of seats reserved in favour of the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, Backward Classes and Women among the wards 6 [x x x] having regard to the provisions of section 9 and also to the following provisions, namely:- (a) all wards shall, as far as practicable, be geographically compact areas; 7 [(b) wards which are reserved for the Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes shall be distributed to different parts of the municipal areas where the proportion of the population of such Castes or Tribes, as the case may be, is comparatively large; and ] 8 [(c) the numbering of wards shall start from the North-West corner of the local area of a municipality 9 [x x x]. (2) The draft of the order under sub-section (1) shall be published for filing objections thereto within a period of not less than 10 [seven days] and a copy of the same shall be sent to the Board concerned for comments. (3) The State Government shall consider any objection and the comments received under sub-section (2) and the draft order shall, if necessary, be amended, altered or modified accordingly, and thereupon it shall become final. Substituted by Rajasthan Act 19 of 1994. Inserted by Rajasthan Act No.2 of 1990 and further amended by Rajasthan Act 19 of 1994. Inserted by Rajasthan Act 19 of 1994. Substituted by Rajasthan Act No.22 of 1994. Inserted by Rajasthan Act 19 of 1994. Deleted by Rajasthan Act No.22 of 1994. Inserted by Rajasthan Act 19 of 1994 and substituted by Rajasthan Act No. 22 of 1994. Original clause (c) deleted and clause (d) renumbered as cl. (c) by Rajasthan Act No.22 of 1994. Deleted by Rajasthan Act No.22 of 1994. Substituted by Rajasthan Act No. 22 of 1994.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 15--> State(s): Rajasthan The election of the members of a Board shall be on the basis of adult suffrage.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 16--> State(s): Rajasthan For every ward there shall be an electoral foil prepared, revised, modified, updated and published in the prescribed manner. Substituted by Rajasthan Act of 1994.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 17--> State(s): Rajasthan Subject to the provisions of section 18, every person who- (a) is not less than 2 [eighteen years] of age on the qualifying date, and (b) is ordinarily resident in a ward of the municipality, shall be entitled to be registered in the electoral roll for that ward. Explanation-(1) A person shall not be deemed to be ordinarily resident in a ward on the ground only that he owns, or is in possession of, a dwelling house therein. (2) A person absenting himself temporarily from his place of ordinary residence shall not, by reason thereof, ceases to be ordinarily resident therein. (3) A person who is a patient in any establishment maintained wholly or mainly for the reception and treatment of persons suffering from mental illness or mental defectiveness or any other illness involving long treatment or who is detained in prison or other legal custody at any place or residing in a hostel for study or residing in a hotel etc. as a casual visitor resident therein. (4) If in any case a question arises as to where a person is ordinarily resident at any relevant time, the question shall be determined with reference to all the relevant facts of the case 3 [and in accordance with such rules as may be made in this behalf by the State Government] 4 [x x x], (5) 'Qualifying date' means the 1st day of January of the year in which electoral roll is so prepared or revised.5 Substituted by Rajasthan Act No. 10 of 1978. Substituted by Rajasthan Act No.7 of 1989. Substituted by Rajasthan Act 19 of 1994. Deleted by Rajasthan Act No. 22 of 1994. Inserted by Rajasthan Act 22 of 2000 [22-7-2000],
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 18--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) A person shall be disqualified for registration in the electoral roll for the ward if he- (a) is not a citizen of India; or (b) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court; or (c) is for the time being disqualified from voting under the provisions of any law relating to corrupt practices and other offences in connection with elections. (2) the name of any person, who becomes so disqualified after registration, shall forthwith be struck off the electoral roll prepared under this Act: Provided that the name of any person struck off the electoral roll of a ward by reason of a disqualification under clause (c) of sub-section (1) shall forthwith be re-entered in that role, if such disqualification is during the period such roll is in force removed under any law authorising such removal. Substituted by Rajasthan Act No. 10 of 1978.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 19--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) No person shall be entitled to be registered in the electoral roll for more than one ward in the same municipality. (2) No person shall be entitled to be registered in an electoral roll more than once.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 19A--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) There shall be a Chief Electoral Officer who shall be such officer of the State Government as the State Election Commission may, in consultation with the State Government, designate or nominate in this behalf. (2) Subject to the superintendence, direction and control of the State Election Commission,- (a) the Chief Electoral Officer shall supervise the preparation, revision and correction of all electoral rolls in the State under this Act; (b) shall supervise the conduct of all elections in the State under this Act; and (c) shall exercise such other powers and functions as the State Election Commission may direct. Inserted by Rajasthan Act 19 of 1994.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 19B--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) For each district in the State, the State Election Commission shall, in consultation with the State Government, designate or nominate a District Election Officer who shall be an officer of the State Government: Provided that the State Election Commission may designate or nominate more than one such officer for a district if the Commission is satisfied that the functions of the office cannot be performed satisfactorily by one officer. (2) Where more than one District Election Officer are designated or nominated for a district under the proviso to sub-section (1), the Commission shall in the order designating or nominating the District Election Officer also specify the area in respect of which each such officer shall exercise jurisdiction. (3) Subject to the superintendence, direction and control of the Chief Electoral Officer, the District Election Officer shall coordinate and supervise all work in connection with the conduct of elections in the municipalities of the district within his jurisdiction. (4) The District Election Officer shall also perform such other functions as may be entrusted to him by the State Election Commission and the Chief Electoral Officer. Inserted by Rajasthan Act 19 of 1994.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 20--> State(s): Rajasthan 2 [(1) The electoral roll for each ward shall, subject to the control of the District Election Officer, be prepared, revised, modified, updated and published by an Electoral Registration Officer who shall be such officer of the State Government or a local authority as the State Election Commission may, in consultation with the State Government, designate or nominate in this behalf.] (2) The Electoral Registration Officer may, subject to any prescribed restrictions employ such persons as he thinks fit for the preparation and revision of the electoral roll for each ward.] Substituted by Rajasthan Act No. 21 of 1974. Substituted by Rajasthan Act 19 of 1994.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 20A--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) The Commission may appoint one or more persons as Assistant Electoral Registration Officers to assist any Electoral Registration Officer in the performance of his functions. (2) Every Assistant Electoral Registration Officer shall, subject to the control of the Electoral Registration Officer, be competent to perform all or any of the functions of the Electoral Registration Officer.] Inserted by Rajasthan Act 19 of 1994.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 20-B--> State(s): Rajasthan (l) Every local authority in the State shall, when so required by the Chief Electoral Officer, make available to any Electoral Registration Officer such staff as may be necessary for the performance of any duties in connection with the preparation and revision of electoral rolls. (2) The authorities specified in sub-section (3) shall, when so required by the Chief Electoral Officer, make available to any returning officer such staff as may be necessary for the performance of any duties in connection with an election. (3) The following shall be the authorities for the purposes of sub-section (2), namely:- (i) every local authority; (ii) any other institution, concern or undertaking which is established by or under a State Act or which is controlled or financed wholly or substantially by funds provided directly or indirectly by the State Government. Ss.20-B & 20-C Inserted by Rajasthan Act 22 of 2000 [22-7-2000],
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 20C--> State(s): Rajasthan The officers and staff deployed in connection with the preparation, revision and correction of the electoral rolls and for the conduct of all elections under this Act shall be deemed to be on deputation to the State Election Commission for the period during which they are so deployed and such officers and staff shall, during that period, be subject to the control and superintendence of the State Election Commission.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 21--> State(s): Rajasthan 1 [Omitted]. Omitted by Rajasthan Act 19 of 1994.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 22--> State(s): Rajasthan If any person makes in connection with- (a) the preparation, revision or correction of an electoral roll, or (b) the inclusion or exclusion of any entry in or from an electoral roll, a statement or declaration in writing which is false and which he either knows or believes to be false or does not believe to be true, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine 1 [which shall not be less than two thousand rupees but which may extend to five thousand rupees], or with both. Inserted by Rajasthan Act 22 of 2000 [22-7-2000],
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 22A--> State(s): Rajasthan (l) If any Electoral Registration Officer or other person required by or under this Act to perform any official duty in connection with the preparation, revision or correction of an electoral roll or the inclusion or extension of any entry in or from that roll, is without reasonable cause guilty of any act or omission in breach of such official duty, he shall be punishable with 1 [imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three months but which may extend to two years and with fine which shall not be less than one thousand rupees but which may extend to two thousand rupees or with both]. (2) No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against any such officer or other person for damages in respect of any such act or omission as aforesaid. (3) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under sub-section (1) unless there is a complaint made by order of, or under authority from the 2 [State Election Commission or the Chief Electoral Officer or the District Election Officer] concerned. Substituted by Rajasthan Act 22 of 2000 [22-7-2000]. Substituted by Rajasthan Act 22 of 2000 [22-7-2000].
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 23--> State(s): Rajasthan 1 [(1) An election to constitute a board shall be completed- (i) before the expiry of its duration specified in section 11; (ii) before the expiration of a period of six months from the date of its dissolution: Provided that where the remainder of the period for which the dissolved board would have continued is less than six months, it shall not be necessary to hold any election under this clause for constituting the board for such period.] (1A) For the aforesaid purpose the State Government shall on the recommendation of the State Election Commission call upon all the wards to elect members, in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the rules and orders made there under, on such date or dates as may be specified in the notification.2 (2) When a new municipality is constituted 3 [x x x], the first board thereof shall, as far as may be, be constituted in accordance with the provisions of this Act relating to general election 4 [x x x] to a board. Substituted by Rajasthan Act 19 of 1994. Inserted by Rajasthan Act 19 of 1994. Deleted by Rajasthan Act 19 of 1994. Deleted by Rajasthan Act 19 of 1994.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 23-A--> State(s): Rajasthan Omitted
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 23-B--> State(s): Rajasthan 1 Omitted. Omitted by Rajasthan Act 19 of 1994.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 24--> State(s): Rajasthan Subject to the provisions contained in section 9 and 26, a person shall not be qualified to be chosen to fill a seat on a board unless- 2 [(a) in the case of a seat reserved for the Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes or Backward Classes, such person is a member of any of these castes or Tribes or Classes, as the case may be, and is an elector for any ward in the municipality;] (b) in the case of a seat reserved for a woman, such person is an elector for any ward in the municipality and belongs to the female sex; 3 [(c) in the case of a seat reserved for a woman belonging to the Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes or Backward Classes, such person is a member of any of these castes or tribes or classes as the case may be, and is an elector for any ward in the municipality and belongs to the female sex;] (d) in the case of any other seat, such person is an elector for any ward in the municipality;] and 4 [(e) he has attained the age of 21 years, in either case whether the seat is reserved or not.] Substituted by Rajasthan Act No. 13 of 1990. Substituted by Rajasthan Act No. 22 of 1994. Substituted by Rajasthan Act No. 22 of 1994. Inserted by Rajasthan Act No. 22 of 1994.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 25--> State(s): Rajasthan Notwithstanding anything contained in section 24, no person shall be entitled, in cases where election to a seat is contested, to contest such election for more than one ward, and every person who may have filed his nomination paper for seats to a board for more than one ward shall withdraw his candidature from all but one of the seats by a notice in writing which shall contain such particulars as may be prescribed and deliver the same before Three O'clock in the afternoon on the last date fixed for withdraw: Provided that if a person fails to withdraw his candidature from all but one seat in the manner specified above, he shall be deemed to have withdrawn his candidature from all seats. Substituted by Rajasthan Act No. 21 of 1974.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 26--> State(s): Rajasthan A person notwithstanding that he is otherwise qualified, shall be disqualified for being chosen as 1 [x x x] 2 [or for being] a member of a board- 3 [(i) who has been convicted of an offence involving moral turpitude or of any other offence by a competent court of law and sentenced to imprisonment for six months or more, or] 4 [(i-a) who has been convicted of an offence under section 203 of this Act, or (i-b) who is under trial in the competent court which has taken cognizance of the offence and framed the charges against him of any offence punishable with imprisonment for five years or more, or (i-c) who has been convicted of an offence under Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954 (Central Act No.37 of 1954), or] (ii) against whom an order has been passed under section 118 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (Central Act V of 1898), in proceedings instituted under section 110 of that Code, such order not having been subsequently reversed, or (iii) who has been dismissed 5 [or removed] from the service of the Central or a State Government or any local authority 6 [or any other authority specified under clause (viii-a)] for misconduct, or (iv) who having been of legal practitioner has been debarred from practising as such by order of any competent authority, or (v) who holds any place of profit in the gift or disposal of the board, or (vi) who is disqualified under section 59 or section 64, or 7 [(vii) if he is so disqualified by or under any law for the time being in force for the purposes of elections to the Rajasthan Legislative Assembly: Provided that no person shall be disqualified on the ground that he is less than 25 years of age, if he has attained the age of 21 years], or (viii) who holds a salaried or part-time appointment under the Central or a State Government or a local authority, or 8 [(viii-a) who holds a salaried whole time or part time appointment under a University or any Corporation, Body, enterprise or Co-operative Society, which is either controlled or wholly or partly financed by the State Government, or ] (ix) who is an undischarged insolvent, or (x) who is suffering from leprosy, or (xi) who has been adjudged by a competent court to be of unsound mind, or 9 [(xii) who, save as hereinafter provided, has directly or indirectly, by himself or any member of his family or his partner, employer or employee, any share or interest in any work done or supply made by the order of such board or in any contract or employment with or under or by or on behalf of such board, or ] (xiii) who is employed as a paid legal practitioner on behalf of such board or 10 [contesting as lawyer against the board in any court of law at the time of filing nomination as candidate for such board or] accepts employment as legal practitioner against such board during the term for which he has been elected, or 11 [(xiv) who has more than two children; and] 12 [(xv) who has been in arrear of any municipal dues for more than two years and against whom proceedings for the recovery have been initiated under chapter VIII of this Act]: Provided that- (a) the disqualification mentioned in clause (i) shall cease to operate after the expiry of 13 [six years] from the date of the release of the disqualified person from imprisonment; (b) the disqualification mentioned in clause (iii) shall cease to operate after the expiry of the period for which a person is ordered to furnish security; (c) the disqualification mentioned in clause (vi) shall cease to operate after the expiry of the period for which a person is so disqualified unless such disqualification is removed earlier by an order of the 14 [State Election Commission]; (d) a person shall not be deemed to have incurred the disqualification under clause (xii) by reason of his- (i) having any share or interest in any joint stock company, otherwise than as a managing director or agent which shall contract with or be employed by or on behalf of the board, or (ii) having any share or interest in any lease, sale or purchase of any immovable property or in any agreement for the same, or (iii) having a share or interest in any newspapers in which any advertisement relating to the affairs of the board may be inserted, or (iv) holding a debenture or being otherwise interested in any loan raised by or on behalf of the board, or (v) having a share or interest in the occasional sale of any article in which he regularly trades to the board to a value not exceeding in any official year such amount as the board, with the sanction of the State Government, may fix in this behalf, or (vi) having a share or interest in the occasional letting out on hire to the board, or in the hiring from the board, of any article for an amount not exceeding in any official year 15 [two thousand rupees] or such higher amount not exceeding 16 [five thousand rupees] as the board, with the sanction of the State Government, may fix in this behalf. 17 [(e) the birth within 18 [three years] from the date of the commencement of the Rajasthan Municipalities (Second Amendment) Act, 1992 (Rajasthan Act No. 32 of 1992), hereinafter in this clause referred to as the date of such commencement, of any additional child shall not be taken into consideration for the purpose of the disqualification mentioned in clause (xiv) and a person having more than two children (excluding the child, if any, born within 19 [three years] from the date of such commencement) shall not be disqualified under that clause for so long as the number of children he had on the date of such commencement does not increase.] 20 [Explanation - For the purpose of clause (xiv), any number of children born out of a single delivery shall be deemed to be one entity and any child given in adoption shall not be excluded while computing the number of children. ] Omitted by Rajasthan Act No. 26 of 1961. Inserted by Rajasthan Act 19 of 1994. Substituted by Rajasthan Ordinance 6 of 2000 [22-7-2000]. Inserted by Rajasthan Act 22 of 2000 [22-7-2000]. Inserted by Rajasthan Act 22 of 2000 [22-7-2000]. Inserted by Rajasthan Act 22 of 2000 [22-7-2000]. Substituted by Rajasthan Act 19 of 1994. Inserted by Rajasthan Act 22 of 2000 [22-7-2000]. Substituted by Rajasthan Act 22 of 2000 [22-7-2000]. Inserted by Rajasthan Act 22 of 2000 [22-7-2000]. Inserted by Rajasthan Act No.32 of 1992. Inserted by Rajasthan Act 22 of 2000 [22-7-2000], Substituted by Rajasthan Act 22 of 2000 [22-7-2000]. Substituted by Rajasthan Act 22 of 2000 [22-7-2000]. Substituted by Rajasthan Act 22 of 2000 [22-7-2000]. Substituted by Rajasthan Act 22 of 2000 [22-7-2000]. Inserted by Rajasthan Act No.32 of 1992. Substituted by Rajasthan Act No.6 of 1995. w.e.f. 13-11-1994. Substituted by Rajasthan Act No.6 of 1995. w.e.f. 13-11-1994. Added by Rajasthan Act 22 of 2000 [22-7-2000].
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 27--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) Except as expressly provided by this Act, everyone who is for the time being, registered in the electoral roll of any ward, shall be entitled to vote in that ward. (2) No person shall vote at an election in any ward, if he is subject to any of the disqualifications referred to in section 18. (3) No person shall at any election vote in more than one ward and if a person votes in more than one ward his votes in all the wards shall be void. (4) No person shall at any election vote in the same ward more than once, notwithstanding that his name may have been registered in the electoral roll thereof more than once, and, if he does so vote, all his votes shall be void. (5) No person shall vote at any election under this Act, if he is confined in a prison whether under a sentence or otherwise or is in the lawful custody of the police; provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to a person subjected to preventive detention under any law for the time being in force.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 28--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) At every election, where a poll is taken, votes shall be given by ballot in such manner as may be prescribed and no votes shall be received by proxy. (2) Every elector shall have one vote. If an elector gives votes to more than one candidate then, at the time of counting of the votes, all votes given by him shall be rejected as void. (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or the rules made there under, the giving and recording of votes by voting by voting machines, in such manner as may be prescribed, may be adopted in such ward or wards of any municipality as the State Election Commission may, having regard to the circumstances of each case, specify. Explanation - For the purpose of sub-section (3), Voting machine' means any machine or apparatus whether operated electronically or otherwise used for giving or recording of votes and any reference to a ballot box or ballot paper in this Act or the rules made there under shall, save as otherwise provided, be construed as including a reference to such voting machine wherever such voting machine is used in any election. Substituted by Rajasthan Act 22 of 2000 [22-7-2000].
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 29--> State(s): Rajasthan 1 Omitted. Omitted by Rajasthan Act No. 22 of 1994, w.e.f. 22-7-1994.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 30--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) A casual vacancy in the office of a member occurring otherwise than by efflux of time shall be filled, subject to the provisions of section 31, at a bye-election, which shall be fixed to take place as soon as may be, in the manner 1 [as may be prescribed] for a general election. (2) A member elected at a bye-election shall hold office so long only as the member in whose place he is elected would have been entitled to hold the office, if the vacancy had not occurred. 2 [(3) When a vacancy occurs on a board by reason of death, resignation or removal of any elected member,- (a) against a seat reserved in any ward for a member of the Scheduled Caste or as the case may be, the Scheduled Tribe or the Backward Classes, such vacancy shall be filled in by a member of such caste or tribe or classes; and (b) against a seat reserved in any ward for a woman, such vacancy shall be filled in by a woman.] Substituted by Rajasthan Act 22 of 1994. Substituted by Rajasthan Act 19 of 1994.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 31--> State(s): Rajasthan where a vacancy occurs on a board by reason of death, resignation, removal, or avoidance of the election of an elected member and the term of office of that member would, in the ordinary course of events, have determined within six months of the occurrence of the vacancy, the State Government may direct that the vacancy be left unfilled until the next general election.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 32--> State(s): Rajasthan The provisions of sections 125, 126, 127, 127-A, 128, 129, 130, 131, 132, 132-A, 133, 134, 134-A, 2 [134-B, 135,135-A, 135-B, 135-C and 136] of the Representation of People Act, 1951 (Central Act XLIII of 1951), shall have effect as if- (a) references therein to an election were references to an election under this Act, (b) references therein to a constituency were references to a ward, (c) in sections 125 and 127, for the expression "under this Act", the expression "under the Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959" and in sections 134 and 136, for the expression "by or under this Act" the expression "by or under the Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959" shall be substituted, and 3 [(d) in sub-section (1) of section 135-B for the words "House of the people or the Legislative Assembly of a State", the words "ward of the municipality" shall be substituted.] Substituted by Rajasthan Act No. 10 of 1978. Substituted by Rajasthan Act 22 of 2000 [22-7-2000]. Inserted by Rajasthan Act 22 of 2000 [22-7-2000].
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 32-A--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) The State Election Commission may impose reasonable restrictions on the use of vehicles or loudspeakers or on displaying of cut outs, hoardings, posters and banners by any candidate or his duly authorised election agent during the period of election commencing from the date of publication of notification for election to a municipality and ending on the date on which the whole process of election is completed. (2) If any candidate or his duly authorised election agent contravenes any of the restrictions imposed by the State Election Commission under sub-section (1), he shall, on conviction, be punishable with a fine which may extend to two thousand rupees. (3) Every person punished under sub-section (2) shall, by an order of the State Election Commission, be liable to be disqualified for being chosen as or for being a member of any municipality for a period which may extend to six years from the date of such order: Provided that State Election Commission may by a subsequent order, for reasons to be recorded, remove any disqualification under this section or reduce the period of any such disqualification. (4) No court shall take cognizance of an offence referred to in sub-section (2) except on the complaint made by an officer authorised in this behalf, by any general or special order, by the State Election Commission. Inserted by Rajasthan Act 22 of 2000 [22-7-2000].
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 33--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) No civil court shall have jurisdiction- (a) to entertain or adjudicate upon any question whether any person is or is not entitled to be registered in an electoral roll prepared under this Act, or (b) to question the legality of any action taken by or under the authority of an Electoral Registration Officer or of any decision given by any authority appointed under this Act, for revision of any such roll, or (c) to question the legality of any action taken or any decision given by the Returning Officer or by any other officer appointed under this Act in connection with an election. (2) No election shall be called in question except by an election petition presented in accordance with the provision of this Act.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 34--> State(s): Rajasthan The election of any person as member of a board may be questioned by an election petition on one or more of the following grounds, namely:- (a) that on the date of election a returned candidate was not qualified, or was disqualified, to be chosen to fill the seat under this Act, or (b) that any corrupt practice specified in section 35 has been committed by a returned candidate or his election agent or by any other person, with the consent of a returned candidate or his election agent, or (c) that any nomination has been improperly rejected, or (d) that the result of the election, in so far as it concerns a returned candidate has been materially affected- (i) by the improper acceptance of any nomination, or (ii) by any corrupt practice committed in the interest of the returned candidate by a person other than that candidate or his election agent or a person acting with the consent of such candidate or election agent, or (iii) by the improper reception, refusal or rejection of any vote or the reception of any vote which is void, or (iv) by any non-compliance with the provisions of this- Act or of any rules or orders made there under, or (e) that in fact the petitioner or some other candidate received a majority of the valid votes, or (f) that, but for the votes obtained by the returned candidate by corrupt practices, the petitioner or some other candidate would have obtained a majority of the valid votes.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 35--> State(s): Rajasthan The following shall be deemed to be corrupt practices for the purposes of an election under this Act, namely:- (1) Bribery, that is to say, any guilt, offer or promise by a candidate or his agent or by any other person of any gratification to any person whomsoever with the object, directly or indirectly, of inducing- (a) a person to stand or not to stand as, or to withdraw from being, a candidate or to retire from contest at an election; or (b) an elector to vote or refrain from voting at an election; or as a reward to- (i) a person for having so stood or not stood, or for having withdrawn his candidature or having retired from contest; or (ii) an elector for having voted or refrained from voting. Explanation - For the purpose of this clause the term "gratification" is not restricted to pecuniary gratification estimable in money, and it includes all forms of entertainment and all forms of employment for reward, but it does not include the payment of any expenses bona fide incurred at, or for the purpose of, any election. (2) Undue influence, that is to say, any direct or indirect interference or attempt to interfere on the part of a candidate or his agent or of any other person, with the free exercise of any electoral right: Provided that- (a) without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of this clause any such person as is referred to therein who- (i) threatens any candidate, or any elector, or any person in whom a candidate or an elector is interested, with injury of any kind including social ostracism and ex-communication or of expulsion from any caste or community; or (ii) induces or attempts to induce a candidate or an elector to believe that he, or any person in whom he is interested, will become or will be rendered as object of divine displeasure or spiritual censure; shall be deemed to interfere with the free exercise of the electoral right of such candidate or elector within the meaning of this clause; (b) a declaration of public policy, or a promise of public action or the mere exercise of a legal right without intent to interfere with an electoral right, shall not be deemed to be interference within the meaning of this clause. 1 [(3) The appeal by a candidate or his agent or by any other person with the consent of a candidate or his election agent to vote or refrain from voting for any person on the ground of his religion, race, caste, community and language or the use of, or appeal to religious symbols or the use, or appeal to national symbols such as the national flag or the nation emblem, for the furtherance of the prospects of the election of that candidate or for prejudicially affecting the election of any candidate: Provided that no symbol allotted under this Act to a candidate shall be deemed to be a religious symbol or a national symbol for the purposes of this clause. (3-A) the promotion of, or attempt to promote feelings of enemity or hatred between different classes of the citizens of India on grounds of religion, race, caste, community or language, by a candidate or his agent or any other person with the consent of a candidate or his election agent for the furtherance of the prospects of the election of that candidate or for prejudicially affecting the election of any candidate. (3-B) The propagation of the practice or the commission of sati or its glorification by a candidate or his agent or any other person with the consent of the candidate or his election agent for the furtherance of the prospects of the election of that candidate or for prejudicially affecting the election of any candidate. Explanation - For the purposes of this clause, "sati" and "glorification" in relation to sati shall have the meaning respectively assigned to them in the Commission of Sati (Prevention) Act, 1987 (Central Act No.3 of 1988).] (4) The publication by a candidate or his agent or by any other person of any statement of fact which is false, and which he either believes to be false or does not believe to be true, in relation to the candidature or withdrawal or retirement from contest of any candidate, being a statement reasonably calculated to prejudice the prospects of that candidate's election. (5) The hiring or procuring, whether on payment or otherwise, of any vehicle or vessel by a candidate or his agent or by any other person for the conveyance of any elector (other than the candidate himself, any member of his family or his agent), to or from any polling station or place fixed for the poll: Provided that the hiring of a vehicle or vessel by an elector or by several electors at their joint cost for the purpose of conveying him or them to or from any such polling station or place fixed for the poll shall be deemed to a corrupt practice under this clause if the vehicle or vessel so hired is a vehicle or vessel not propelled by mechanical power: Provided further that the use of any public transport vehicle or vessel or any tram car or railway carriage by any elector at his own cost for the purpose of going to or coming from any such polling station or place shall not be deemed to be a corrupt practice under this clause. Explanation - In this clause the expression "vehicle" means any vehicle used or capable of being used for the purpose of road transport whether propelled by mechanical power or otherwise' and whether used for drawing other vehicles or otherwise. (6) The incurring or authorising by a candidate or his agent or by any other person of expenditure in contravention of the provision of any rule or order relating to election made under this Act. (7) The obtaining or procuring or abetting or attempting to obtain or procure by a candidate or his agent or by any other person any assistance (other than the giving of vote) for the furtherance of the prospects of the candidate's election from any person in the service of the Government and belonging to any of the following classes, namely:- (a) gazetted officers; (b) stipendiary judges and magistrates; (c) members of the armed forces of the Union; (d) members of the police force; (e) excise officers; (f) revenue officers including village accountants such as patwaris and the like but excluding other village officers; and (g) such other class of person in the service of the Government as may be prescribed. Explanation -(1) For the purpose of clause (7) a person shall be deemed to assist in the furtherance of the prospects of a candidate's election if he acts as an election agent or polling agent or counting agent of that candidate. (2) In this section the expression "agent" includes an election agent, a polling agent and any person who is held to have acted as an agent in connection with the election with the consent of the candidate. Substituted by Rajasthan Act 22 of 2000 [22-7-2000] for sub-section (3).
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 36--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) An election petition shall be presented within thirty days from the date on which the result of the election in question is announced by the returning officer. (2) The petition may be presented by any candidate at such election or by any elector of the ward. Explanation-(1) In sub-section (2) "elector" means the person who was entitled to vote at the election to which the petition related, whether he has voted at such election or not. Explanation-(2) An election petition shall be deemed to have been duly presented if it is delivered by the person making the petition or by a person authorised in writing in this behalf by the person making the petition.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 37--> State(s): Rajasthan A petitioner shall join as respondents to his petition- (a) where the petitioner, in addition to claiming a declaration that the election of all or any of the returned candidate is void, claims a further declaration that he himself or any other candidate has been duly elected, all the contesting candidates other than the petitioner, and where no such further declaration is claimed, all the returned candidates; and (b) any other candidate against whom allegations of any corrupt practice are made in the petition.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 38--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) An election petition- (a) shall contain a concise statement of the material facts on which the petitioner relies; (b) shall set forth full particulars of any corrupt practice that the petitioner alleges, including as full a statement as possible of the names of the parties alleged to have committed such corrupt practice and the date and place of the commission of each such practice; and (c) shall be signed by the petitioner and verified in the manner laid down in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Central Act V of 1908) for the verification of pleadings. (2) Any schedule or annexure to the petition shall also be signed by the petitioner and verified in the same manner as the petition.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 39--> State(s): Rajasthan A petitioner may, in addition to claiming a declaration that the election of all or any of the returned candidates is void, claim a further declaration that he himself or any other candidate has been duly elected.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 40--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) An election petition may be presented to, and shall be heard by, the District Judge having jurisdiction over the area in which the municipal office is situated : Provided that where an election petition is presented as aforesaid to a District Judge, he may for reasons to be recorded in writing transfer the same for hearing and disposal to an Additional District Judge-sub ordinate to him. (2) The District Judge or Additional District Judge by whom it is heard in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (1) is hereinafter referred to as the Judge. Substituted by Rajasthan Act No. 19 of 1994.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 41--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) The Judge shall, as soon as may be, cause a copy of the petition together with a copy of the schedule or annexure referred to in sub-section (2) of section 38 to be served on each respondent. (2) All election petitions in respect of the same election may, in the discretion of the Judge, be tried separately or in one or more groups. (3) Except so far as may be otherwise provided by this Act or by any rule made there under, the procedure provided in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Central act V of 1908) in regard to the trial of suits shall, so far as it is not inconsistent with this Act or any rule and so far as it can be made applicable, be followed in the hearing of election petitions : Provided that the Judge Shall have the discretion to refuse, for reasons to be recorded in writing, to examine any witness or witnesses if he is of the opinion that his or their evidence is not material for the decision of the petition or that the party tendering such witness or witnesses is doing so on frivolous grounds or with a view to delay the proceedings. (4) The provisions of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (Central Act I of 1872) shall be deemed to apply in all respects to the trial of an election petition : Provided that - (a) notwithstanding anything in any law to the contrary, no document shall be inadmissible in evidence at such trial on the ground that it is not duly stamped or registered; (b) no witness or other person shall be required to state for whom he has voted at an election; (c) no witness shall be excused from answering any question as to any matter relevant to a matter in issue in such trial upon the ground that the answer to such question may criminate or tend to criminate him or that it may expose or tend to expose him to any penalty or forfeiture; (d) a witness, who answers truly all questions which he is required to answer shall be entitled to receive a certificate of indemnity from the Judge and no such answer shall, except in the case of any criminal proceeding for perjury in respect of the evidence, against him in any civil or criminal proceeding; and (e) when a certificate of indemnity has been granted to any witness, it may be pleaded by him in any court and shall be a full and complete defence to or upon any charge arising out of the matter to which certificate relates, but it shall not be deemed to relieve him from any disqualification in connection with an election. (5) The reasonable expenses incurred by any person in attending to give evidence may be allowed by the Judge to such person and shall, unless the Judge otherwise directs, be deemed to be part of the costs. (6) When, in all election petition, a declaration that any candidate other than the returned candidate has been duly elected is claimed, the returned candidate or any other party may give evidence to prove that the election of such candidate would have been void if he had been the returned candidate and a petition had been presented calling in question his election : Provided that the returned candidate or such other party, as aforesaid, shall not be entitled to give such evidence unless he has, within fourteen days from the date of the service of the copy of the petition under sub-section (1), given notice to the Judge of his intention to do so and has also given the security and further security referred to in sub-section (1) and (2) respectively of section 53. (7) Every notice referred to in the proviso to sub-section (6) shall be accompanied by the statement and list of particulars required by section 39 and shall be signed and verified in like manner. (8) Any candidate, not already a respondent, shall, upon application made by him to the Judge within fourteen days from the date of commencement of the trial and subject to the provisions of section 54, be entitled to be joined as a respondent to the petition. (9) For the purposes of sub-section (8), the trial of an election petition shall be deemed to commence on the date fixed for the respondents to appear before the Judge and answer the claim or claims made in the petition. (10) The Judge may, upon such terms as to costs and otherwise as he may deem fit, allow the particulars of any corrupt practice alleged in the petition to be amended or amplified in such manner as may in his opinion be necessary for ensuring a fair and effective trial of the petition but shall not allow any amendment of the petition which will have the effect of introducing particulars of a corrupt practice not previously alleged in the petition. (11) Every election petition shall be tried as expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall be made to conclude the trial within six months from the date of the service of the copy of the petition under sub-section (1).
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 42--> State(s): Rajasthan Any appearance, application or act before the Judge may be made or done by the party in person or by a pleader duly appointed to act on his behalf: Provided that it shall be open to the Judge to direct any party to appear in person whenever the Judge considers it necessary.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 43--> State(s): Rajasthan The Judge hearing an election petition shall have the same powers and privileges as a Judge of a Civil Court when trying a suit and may, for the purpose of serving any notice or issuing any process or doing any other thing, employ any officer, clerk or peon attached to his court.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 44--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) At the conclusion of the trial of an election petition, the Judge shall make an order- (a) dismissing the election petition; or (b) declaring the election of all or any of the returned candidates to be void; or (c) declaring the election of all or any of the returned candidates to be void and the petitioner or any other candidate to have been duly elected. (2) At the time of making an order under sub-section (1), the Judge shall also make an order- (a) where any charge is made in the petition of any corrupt practice having been committed at the election, recording- (i) a finding whether any corrupt practice has or has not been proved to have been committed by, or with the consent of, any candidate or his agent at the election and the nature of that corrupt practice, and (ii) the names of all persons, if any, who have been proved at the trial to have been guilty of any corrupt practice and the nature of that corrupt practice, and (b) fixing the total amount of costs payable and specifying the persons by and to whom costs shall be paid : Provided that a person who is not a party to the election petition shall not be named in the order under sub-clause (ii) of clause (a) unless- (a) he has been given notice to appear before the Judge and to show cause why he should not be so named, and (b) if he appears in pursuance of the notice, he has been given an opportunity of cross-examining any witness who has already been examined by the Judge and has given evidence against him, of calling evidence in his defence and of being heard. (3) The Judge shall dismiss an election petition which does not comply with the provisions of section 36 or section 37 or section 53. (4) The Judge shall declare the election of a returned candidate to be void on any of the grounds specified in clauses (a) and (d) of section 34. (5) If, in the opinion of the Judge, the returned candidate has been guilty by an agent, other than his election agent, of any corrupt practice specified in section 35, but the Judge is satisfied- (a) that no such corrupt practice was committed at the election by the candidate or his election agent, and every such corrupt practice was committed contrary to the orders, and without the consent, $of the candidate or his election agent, (b) that all such corrupt practices were of a trivial and limited character or took the form of customary hospitality which did not affect the result of the election, (c) that the candidate and his election agent took all reasonable steps for preventing the commission of corrupt practices at the election, and (d) that in all other respects the election was free from any corrupt practice on the part of the candidate or any of his agents, the Judge may decide that the election of the returned candidate is not void. (6) If any person who has lodged a petition has, in addition to calling in question the election of the returned candidate, claimed a declaration that he himself or any other candidate has been duly elected, the Judge, if satisfied as to the matters specified in clauses (e) and (f) of section 34, shall, after declaring the election of (the returned candidate to be void, declare the petitioner or such other candidate, as the case may be, to have been duly elected. (7) If during the trial of an election petition it appears that there is an equality of votes between any candidates at the election and that the addition of a vote would entitle any of those candidates to be declared elected, then- (a) any decision, made by the returning officer under the provisions of this Act or any rules made there under, shall, in so far as it determines the question between those candidates, be effective also for the purposes of the petition; and (b) in so far as that question is not determined by such a decision, the Judge shall decide between them by lot and proceed as if the one on whom the lot then falls had received an additional vote. (8) The Judge shall, after announcing the orders made under this section, send a copy thereof to such authority or officer, as may be appointed by the State Government for the purpose. (9) In sub-sections (2) and (5) the expression 'agent' has the same meaning as in section 35.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 45--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) Every order of the Judge under section 44 shall take effect as soon as it is pronounced by him. (2) Whereby any such order the election of a returned candidate is declared to be void, acts and proceedings in which that candidate has, before the date of the order, participated as a member of the board shall not be invalidated by reason of that order nor shall such candidate be subjected to any liability or penalty on the ground of such participation.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 46--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) An appeal shall lie to the High Court from every order made by the Judge under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of section 44. (2) The High Court shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, have the same powers, jurisdiction and authority, and follow the same procedure, with respect to an appeal under this section as if the appeal were an appeal from an original decree passed by a civil court situated within the local limits of its civil appellate jurisdiction. (3) Every appeal under this section shall be preferred within a period of thirty days from the date of the order appealed from : Provided that the High Court may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said period of thirty days, if it is satisfied that the appellant had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal within such period. (4) Where an appeal has been preferred against an order under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 44 the High Court may, on sufficient cause being shown, stay operation of the order appealed from and in such a case the order shall be deemed not to have taken effect under sub-section (1) of section 45. (5) Every appeal shall be decided as expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall be made to determine it finally within three months from the date on which the memorandum of appeal is presented to the High Court.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 47--> State(s): Rajasthan Whenever 1 [the election of all the members or of more than two- thirds of the total number of the members of a board is declared to be void under section 44 or on appeal under section 46] the State Government shall 2 [dissolve the board whereupon Substituted by Rajasthan Act No. 26 of 1961 w.e.f. 31-7-1961. Substituted by Rajasthan Act No. 19 of 1994.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 48--> State(s): Rajasthan The decision of the High Court on an appeal under section 46. and, only subject to such decision, the order of the Judge under section 44 shall be final and conclusive.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 49--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) An election petition may be withdrawn only by leave of the Judge. (2) Where an application for withdrawal is made under subsection (1), notice thereof fixing a date for the hearing of the application shall be given to all other parties to the petition. (3) If there are more petitioners than one, no application to withdrawn an election petition shall be made except with the consent of all the petitioners. (4) No application for withdrawal shall be granted, if in the opinion of the Judge such application has been induced by any bargain or consideration which ought not to be allowed. (5) If the application for withdrawal is granted, the petitioner shall be ordered to pay the costs of the respondents theretofore incurred or such portion thereof as the Judge may think fit.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 50--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) An election petition shall abate only on the death of a sole petitioner or of the survivor of several petitioners. (2) Where an election petition abates under sub-section (1), notice of the abatement shall be given to all the respondents to the petition.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 51--> State(s): Rajasthan After a notice of the abatement is served under sub-section (2) of section 50, any of the respondent who might himself have been a petitioner may, within fourteen days of such service, apply to be substituted as petitioner and upon compliance with the conditions of section 53 as to security shall be entitled to be so substituted and to continue the proceedings upon such terms as the Judge may think fit.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 52--> State(s): Rajasthan If, before the conclusion of the trial of an election petition, the sole respondent dies or gives notice that he does not intend to oppose the petition or any of the respondents dies or gives such notice and there is no other respondent who is opposing the petition, the Judge shall cause a notice of such event to be served upon all other parties to the petition and if thereupon any person applies within fourteen days of the date of issue of such notice to be substituted in place of such respondent to oppose the petition, the Judge may order such substitution upon such terms as he may thinks fit.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 53--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) A person filing an election petition shall enclose with the petition a Government treasury receipt showing that a deposit of two hundred rupees in the case of a city or of one hundred rupees in the case of any other municipality has been made by him in a Government treasury in favour of the Judge as security for the costs of the petition. (2) During the course of the trial of an election petition, the Judge may at any time call upon a petitioner to give such further security for costs as he may direct and may, if the petitioner fails to do so, dismiss the petition.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 54--> State(s): Rajasthan No person shall be entitled to be joined as a respondent under sub-section (8) of section 41 unless he has given such security for costs as the Judge may direct.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 55--> State(s): Rajasthan Every person who prefers an appeal under sub-section (1) of section 46 shall enclose with the memorandum of appeal a Government treasury receipt showing that a deposit of one hundred rupees has been made by him in the Government treasury in favour of the High Court as security for the costs of the appeal.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 56--> State(s): Rajasthan Costs including pleader's fees shall be in the discretion of the Judge.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 57--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) If in any order as to costs there is a direction for payment of costs by any party to any person, such costs shall, if they have not already been paid, be paid in full or so far as possible, out of the security deposit and the further security deposit, if any, made by such party, on an application made in writing in that behalf, within the period of six months from the date of such order by the person in whose favour the costs have been awarded. (2) If there is any balance left of any of the said security deposits after payment under sub-section (1) of the costs referred to in that sub-section, such balance, or where no costs have been awarded or no application as aforesaid, has been made within the said period of six months, the whole of the said security deposits, may on an application made in that behalf in writing to the Judge by the person by whom the deposits have been made or if such person dies after making such deposits by the legal representative of such person, be returned to the said person or to his legal representative, as the case may be.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 58--> State(s): Rajasthan Any order as to costs passed by the Judge shall be executed by him on application made in that behalf in the same manner and by the same procedure as if it were a decree, for the payment of money made by himself in a suit: Provided that where any such costs or any portion thereof may be recovered by an application made under sub-section (1) of section 57 no application shall lie under this section within a period of six months from the date of such order unless it is for the recovery of the balance of any costs which has been left unrealised after an application has been made under that sub-section owing to the insufficiency of the amount of the security deposits referred to in that sub-section.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 59--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) The following shall entail disqualifications for membership of a board, namely- (a) corrupt practices specified in section 35, (b) 1 [X X X] (c) electoral offences referred to in section 32. (2) The period of such disqualification shall be 2 [six years] from the date of the finding of the Judge as to such corrupt practice or from the date of conviction for such offence, as the case may be. Deleted by Rajasthan Act 22 of 2000, w.r.e.f. 22-7-2000. Substituted by Rajasthan Act 22 of 2000, w.r.e.f. 22-7-2000.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 60--> State(s): Rajasthan The 1 [State Election Commission] may, for reasons to be recorded, remove any disqualification *[under clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 59] or reduce the period of any such disqualification. Substituted by Rajasthan Act 22 of 2000, w.r.e.f.22-7-2000.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 61--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) Every member shall, before entering upon his duties as such, make and subscribe before the Collector or his nominee for the purpose an oath or affirmation in the prescribed form. (2) Any member who fails to comply with the provisions of sub- section (1) within a period of three months from the date of the first meeting of the board shall be deemed to have vacated his seat.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 62--> State(s): Rajasthan A member may resign his membership by giving notice in writing to that effect duly attested by Magistrate 1 [X X X] to the chairman and such resignation shall take effect after the expiry of fifteen days from the date of the notice. Deleted by Rajasthan Act 22 of 2000, w.r.e.f.22-7-2000.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 63--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) The State Government may, subject to the provisions of sub-section (2) and (3), remove a member of a board on any of the following grounds, namely- (a) that he has absented himself from the meetings of the board for more than three consecutive months or three consecutive ordinary general meetings, whichever is the longer period, without leave of the board : Provided that the period during which such member was in jail as an under trial prisoner or as a detenue or as a political prisoner shall not be taken into account, (b) that he has failed to comply with the provisions of section 61, 1 [(c) that after his election he has incurred any of the disqualification mentioned in section 18 or section 26 or has ceased to fulfill the requirements of section 24.] (d) that he has- (i) been guilty of misconduct in the discharge of his duties, or (ii) been guilty of any disgraceful conduct, or (iii) become incapable of performing his duties as a member, or (iv) otherwise 2 [x x x] abused in any manner his position as such member: Provided that an order of removal shall be passed by the State Government after such inquiry as it considers necessary to make either itself or through 3 [such existing or retired officer not below the rank of State Level Services] or authority as it may direct and after the member concerned has been afforded an opportunity of explanation. 4 [(1-A) The power conferred by sub-section (1) may be exercised by the State Government of its own motion or upon the receipt of a report from the board in that behalf or upon the facts otherwise coming to the knowledge of the State Government: Provided that, until a member is removed from office by an order of the State Government under this section, he shall not vacate his office and shall, subject to the provisions contained in sub- section (4), continue to act as, and exercise all the powers and perform all the duties of, a member and shall as such be entitled to all the rights and be subject to all the liabilities, of a member under this Act.] (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) where it is proposed to remove a member on any of the grounds specified in clause (c) or clause (d) of sub-section (1), as a result of the inquiry referred to in the proviso to the sub-section and after hearing the explanation of the member concerned, the State Government shall draw up a statement setting out distinctly the charge against the member and shall send the same for inquiry and findings by Judicial Officer of the rank of a District Judge to be appointed by the State Government for the purpose. (3) The Judicial Officer so appointed shall proceed to inquire into the charge in the prescribed manner, hear the member concerned, if he makes appearance, record his findings on each matter embodied in the statement as well as on every other matter he considers relevant to the charge and send the record along with such findings to the State Government, which shall thereupon pass 5 [final orders or order for re-enquiry by any such other officer as may be deemed proper]. (4) Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, the State Government may place under suspension a member against whom proceedings have been commenced under this section until the conclusion of the inquiry and the passing of the final order and the member so suspended shall not be entitled to take part in any proceedings of the board or otherwise perform the duties of a member thereof. (5) Every 6 [final] order of the State Government passed under this section shall be published in the Official Gazette and shall be final and no such order shall be liable to be called in question in any court. Substituted by Rajasthan Act No. 26 of 1961. Deleted by Rajasthan Act 22 of 2000. w.r.e.f. 22-7-2000. Substituted by Rajasthan Act 22 of 2000, w.r.e.f. 22-7-2000. Inserted by Rajasthan Act No. 26 of 1961. Substituted by Rajasthan Act 22 of 2000, w.r.e.f. 22-7-2000. Inserted by Rajasthan Act 22 of 2000, w.r.e.f. 22-7-2000.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 63A--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) In respect of any allegations of the nature specified in clause (d) of sub-section (1) of section 63 against any member or the Chairman or Vice-Chairman of a board, the inquiry referred to in the proviso to the said sub-section, and in sub-sections (2) and (3), of that section may be initiated against such member, Chairman or Vice Chairman even after the expiry of the term of office of that board or after he has ceased to be such member, Chairman, or Vice-Chairman or, if already initiated before such expiry or ceaser, may be continued thereafter and in each such case the State Government shall, by order in writing, only record its findings in conformity with those of the Judicial Officer recorded under sub-section (3) of section 63. (2) The provisions of sub-section (5) of section 63 shall apply to the findings of the State Government so recorded. Inserted by Rajasthan Act No. 26 of 1961.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 64--> State(s): Rajasthan A member 1 [who has been removed under clause (d) of sub-section (1) of section 63 or against whom adverse findings have been recorded under section, 63A] shall not be eligible for re-election for a period of 2 [six years] from the date of the order of his removal 3 [or of recording adverse findings as the case may be.] Substituted and Inserted by Rajasthan Act No. 26 of 1961 w.e.f. 31-7-1961. Substituted by Rajasthan Act 22 of 2000, w.r.e.f.22-7-2000. Substituted and Inserted by Rajasthan Act No. 26 of 1961 w.e.f. 3.1-7-1961.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 64A--> State(s): Rajasthan No person shall remain both the member of a municipality and a member of Parliament or State Legislative Assembly or a Panchayati Raj Institution and if a person who is already a member of Parliament or State Legislative Assembly or a Panchayati Raj Institution is elected as a member of a municipality, then, at the expiration of fourteen days from the date of being elected as such member, he shall cease to be such member unless he has previously resigned his seat in the Parliament or the State Legislative Assembly or the Panchayat Raj Institution, as the case may be: Provided that if a person, who is already a member of a municipality, is elected as a member of Parliament or the State Legislative Assembly or a Panchayat Raj Institution, then, at the expiration of fourteen days from the date of being elected as a member of Parliament or the State Legislative Assembly or a Panchayati Raj Institution, as the case may be, he shall cease to be such member unless he has previously resigned his seat in the Parliament or the State Legislative Assembly or the Panchayati Raj Institution, as the case may be. Inserted by Rajasthan Act 22 of 2000. w.r.e.f. 22-7-2000.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 65--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) For every board, there shall be a chairman and a vice-chairman. (2) The Chairman shall be elected, in accordance with rules made by the State Government in that behalf, 1 [by the elected members] of the board from amongst themselves. (3) The vice-chairman shall be elected 2 [by the elected members] of the board from amongst themselves in accordance with rules made in this behalf. (4) For every council there shall be a president and a vice-president. (5) The president and the vice-president shall be elected in accordance with rules made by the State Government in that behalf, 3 [by the elected councillors] of the council from amongst themselves. 4 [(5A) The office of Chairpersons of municipalities shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and the Backward Classes as also for women in such manner as may be prescribed. 5 [x x x] 6 [(5b) The State Government shall allocate the offices of Chairpersons reserved under sub-section (5A) to different municipalities in the State and in allocating such offices regard shall be had to the following provisions, namely:- (i) Municipalities in which office is reserved for the Scheduled Castes or 7 [Scheduled Tribes] shall be distributed throughout the State and located as far as practicable in those areas where the proportion of their population to the total population is comparatively large; (ii) the municipalities in which office is reserved for women shall be distributed throughout the State; (iii) 8 [deleted] 9 [(5C) The reservation of the office of the Chairpersons for the members of Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes or Backward Classes under this section shall cease to have effect on the expiration of the period specified in article 334 of the Constitution of India. ] (6) Every chairman or vice-chairman who, for a period exceeding one month, remains absent from the municipality so as to be unable to perform his duties as such chairman or vice-chairman shall cease to be chairman or vice-chairman unless leave so to absent himself has been granted by the board. (7) Leave under the last preceding sub-section shall not be granted for a period exceeding six months. Whenever leave is granted to a chairman and the office of the vice-chairman is vacant the vacancy shall be filled up by election by the board from amongst its members within such period and in such manner as may be prescribed. When leave is granted to a vice-chairman or when the vice-chairman is acting for the chairman, the vacancy in the office of the vice-chairman may be filled up by election of some other member thereto. (8) If the vice-chairman of a board is elected as chairman of the board, he shall be deemed to have vacated his office as vice-chairman. (9) Every chairman and every vice-chairman of a board shall forthwith be deemed to have vacated his office, if a resolution expressing want of confidence in him is passed 10 [in accordance with the procedure prescribed]. (10) Every chairman and every vice-chairman shall be removable from his office as such chairman and vice-chairman on any of the grounds specified in clause (d) of sub-section (1) of section 63, and the provisions of sub-sections (2) to (5) of that section shall apply. (11) The term of office of every chairman and every vice-chairman shall, save as otherwise provided in this Act, correspond with the term of the board. (12) A Vice-Chairman may resign his office by giving notice in writing to the Chairman, and a may resign by 11 [personally] giving a like notice to such officer as may be appointed or authorised by the State Government in this behalf. Every such resignation shall take effect on the expiry of month from the delivery of the notice to the Chairman or such officer as the case may be. (13) A vacancy in the office of a Chairman or a Vice-Chairman occurring otherwise than by efflux of time shall be filled in accordance with the provisions of the foregoing sub-sections and the person elected to fill up the vacancy shall hold office for the residue of the term for which the Chairman or Vice-Chairman in whose place he is so elected would have held, if the vacancy had not occurred. (14) The names of the chairman and vice-chairman elected in accordance with the provisions of this section shall be published, as soon as conveniently may be, in the Official Gazette. 12 (14a) deleted. 13 [(15) The Chairman of a board may receive out of the municipal fund such monthly allowance as may be prescribed.] 14 [(16) The mayor of a Corporation may receive out of the municipal fund such monthly emoluments, allowances and facilities as may be prescribed.] Substituted by Rajasthan Act 19 of 1994. Substituted by Rajasthan Act 19 of 1994. Substituted by Rajasthan Act 19 of 1994. Inserted by Rajasthan Act 19 of 1994. Three provisos and Explanation omitted by Rajasthan Act 22 of 1994. Inserted by Rajasthan Act 19 of 1994. Substituted by Rajasthan Act No.22 of 1994. Deleted by Rajasthan Act No.22 of 1994. Inserted by Rajasthan Act 19 of 1994. Substituted by Rajasthan Act No. 21 of 1974. Inserted by Rajasthan Act No.2 of 1990. Inserted by Rajasthan Act 19 of 1994 and deleted by Rajasthan Act No.22 of 1994. Substituted by Rajasthan Act No.21 of 1974. Inserted by Rajasthan Act No.32 of 1992.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 66--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) The election of a chairman or vice-chairman under section 65 shall not be called in question except by an election petition presented to- (a) the District Judge sitting at the place where the municipal office is situated, or (b) where there is no such District Judge, the Civil Judge so sitting, or (c) any other Judge specially appointed by the State Government for the purpose : Provided that where an election petition is presented as aforesaid to a District Judge, he may, for the reasons to be recorded in writing, transfer the same for hearing and disposal to a Civil Judge subordinate to him and sitting at the place where the municipal office is situated. Explanation-The District Judge or Civil Judge or any other Judge to whom an election petition is presented or transferred and by whom it is heard in accordance with the provisions of this section is hereinafter referred to as the Judge. (2) Such petition may be presented by a candidate who has been defeated or whose nomination has been rejected in such manner, on such grounds and within such period as may be prescribed, along with a deposit of one hundred rupees. (3) In hearing the petition, the Judge shall follow the procedure laid down in section 41 and exercise the powers specified in sections 43 and 44. (4) Without prejudice to the generality of the provision contained in sub-section (3), the Judge may, if the petition is found to be frivolous, direct that the deposit mentioned in sub- section (2) shall be forfeited to the State Government.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 67--> State(s): Rajasthan It shall be the duty of the chairman of a board- (a) to convene and preside, unless prevented by reasonable cause, at all meetings of the board and subject to the provisions of the rules for the time being in force under clause (a) of section 88 to regulate the conduct of business at such meetings; (b) to watch over the financial and executive administration of the board and bring to the notice of the board any defect therein; (c) to perform all the duties and exercise all the powers specifically imposed or conferred upon him by or delegated to him under and in accordance with this Act; (d) subject to the provision of section 78 and of the rules for the time being in force, to perform such other executive functions as may be performed by or on behalf of the board over which he presides; (e) to exercise supervision and control over the acts and proceedings of all officers and servants of the board in matters of executive administration and in matters concerning the accounts and records of the board, and subject to the rules for the time being in force, and to the provisions of Chapter XIII, to dispose of all questions relating to the service of the said officers and servants, and their pay, privileges and allowances; (f) to furnish to such officer as may be appointed or authorised by the State Government in this behalf, a copy of every resolution passed at any meeting of the board; and (g) to furnish any extract from the minutes of the proceedings of the board or of any committee or other document or thing which the officer, appointed or authorised by the State Government in this behalf, from time to time calls for under section 283.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 68--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) The Executive Officer shall be responsible for the custody of all the records of the board including all papers and documents connected with the proceedings of the board and all the committees and shall arrange for performance of such duties relating to the proceedings of such bodies as they may respectively impose. (2) Where any proceeding or order of a board or of any of its committees or of the chairman or vice-chairman or of any member is inconsistent with the provision of this Act and the rules made there under or is detriment to the interest of the board, the Executive Officer shall put up a note of dissent and report the matter to the Collector of the district and the State Government: 3 [Provided that in relation to a Corporation, this sub-section shall have effect as if the words "the Collector of the district and" were omitted therefrom: ] 4 [Provided further that the mere putting up of a notice of dissent and a report of the matter to the Collector and the State Government will not operate as a stay to the proceeding or the order. ] (3) 5 [After examining the note of dissent reported under subsection (2), the State Government] or any officer authorised by it in this behalf may make such order as it thinks fit which shall be binding on the board. (4) The Executive Officer shall have the power, subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules made there under to authenticate under his signatures all licences, permissions and orders which may be granted or given by the board under this Act and no licence or permission or order shall be legal and valid unless it has been so authenticated by the Executive Officer. 6 [(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 78, the Executive Officer shall exercise such other powers of the board as may be prescribed. ] Substituted by Rajasthan Act No. 10 of 1976. Substituted by Rajasthan Act No. 21 of 1974. Inserted by Rajasthan Act No.32 of 1992. Inserted by Rajasthan Act 19 of 1994. Substituted by Rajasthan Act No. 10 of 1976. Inserted by Act No. 10 of 1976.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 69--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) It shall be the duty of the vice-chairman of a board to exercise such of the powers and perform such of the duties of the chairman as the chairman or the board from time to time delegates to him. (2) It shall also be the duty of the vice-chairman- (a) in the absence of the chairman and unless prevented by reasonable cause, to preside at the meetings of the board and when so presiding to exercise the same authority as is vested in the chairman under clause (a) of section 67, and (b) pending the election or nomination of a chairman or during the absence of a chairman on leave, to exercise the powers and perform the duties of the chairman.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 69A--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) Whenever- (i) a chairman resigns or ceases to be such or is removed from or vacates the office of chairman, or is placed under suspension or his election as a member or chairman is declared to be void, (ii) a vice-chairman resigns or ceases to be such or is removed from, or vacates the office of vice-chairman or is placed under suspension or his election as a member or vice-chairman is declared to be void, (iii) a member resigns or is removed or placed under suspension or his election is declared to be void, (iv) a board is dissolved or superseded or it otherwise becomes defunct, such chairman, vice-chairman or member or the chairman, vice-chairman and members of such board, as the case may be, shall forthwith hand over charge in the prescribed manner of his or their office including all papers and properties pertaining to such office, in his or their actual possession or occupation,- (a) in the case of a chairman, to the vice-chairman and if there be no vice-chairman, to such member as the State Government may direct, (b) in the case of a vice-chairman, to the chairman, and if there be no chairman, to such member as the State Government may direct, (c) in the case of a member, to a chairman, and in his absence, to the vice-chairman, (d) in the case of a board dissolved 2 [x x x] or otherwise becoming defunct, to the newly constituted board or, as the case may be, to the 3 [officer] appointed under section 4 [295]: Provided that a member to whom charge has been handed over under clauses (a) and (b) shall hold charge for a period, not exceeding one month, or till the taking over of charge by the chairman or the vice-chairman, as the case may be, whichever may be earlier. (2) If any person fails or refuses to hand over charge of office as required under sub-section (1), the prescribed authority may, by order in writing, direct the person so failing or refusing to hand over such charge forthwith to the person or persons entitled thereto under sub-section (1). (3) If the person to whom a direction has been issued under sub-section (2) fails to comply with the direction, he shall, on conviction, be punished with imprisonment for a term not exceeding one month or with fine not exceeding one hundred rupees or with both. (4) Any officer empowered by the prescribed authority in this behalf may, without prejudice to any action that has been or may be taken under sub-section (3), use such force as may be deemed necessary for enforcing the provisions of sub-section (1) and may for that purpose invoke in the prescribed manner the assistance of the police or the nearest Magistrate of the First Class competent to do so.] Inserted by Rajasthan Act No. 20 of 1962. Omitted by Rajasthan Act 19 of 1994. Substituted by Rajasthan Act 19 of 1994. Substituted by Rajasthan Act 19 of 1994.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 70--> State(s): Rajasthan Every board or a committee thereof shall, in regard to the conduct of business at its meeting, follow such procedure as may be prescribed. Substituted by Rajasthan Act No. 21 of 1974.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 71--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) Any member may call the attention of the proper authority to any neglect in the execution of a municipal work, to any waste of municipal property or to the wants of any locality, and may suggest any improvement which he considers desirable. (2) Every member shall have the right to interpellate the chairman and to move resolutions on matters connected with the municipal administration, subject to the rules prescribed. (3) Every member shall have the right to inspect records of the board at the municipal office after giving due notice to the chairman; provided that the chairman may for reasons given in writing forbid such inspection.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 72--> State(s): Rajasthan 2 [(1)] Motion expressing non-confidence in the chairman or the vice-chairman shall be made and considered in the manner prescribed. 3 [(2) No notice of motion under this section shall be made within one year of the assumption of office by a Chairman or a Vice-Chairman. (3) If a motion under sub-section (1) is not carried, no notice of a subsequent motion expressing non-confidence in the same Chairman or Vice-Chairman shall be made until after the expiration of two years from the date of the meeting in which the motion was considered.] Substituted by Rajasthan Act No. 21 of 1974. Re-numbered by Rajasthan Act No. 19 of 1994. Inserted by Rajasthan Act 19 of 1994.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 73--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) In every city there shall be an executive committee of the council consisting of- (i) the president of the council, (ii) the vice-president of the council, (iii) seven councillors of the council elected by the council 1 [including two from the women members], (iv) the chairman of committees constituted by the council under sub-sections (3) and (5). (2) The municipal commissioner of the council shall ex-officio be the secretary of the executive committee. (3) In addition to the executive committee, every council shall also constitute the following committees, each consisting, subject to the provisions of section 74, of such number of members, not exceeding seven as the council may determine, namely- (i) a finance committee, (ii) a health and sanitation committee, (iii) a buildings and works committee, (iv) a rules and bye-laws committee, and (v) a public conveyance committee. (4) The executive committee and the committees mentioned in sub- section (3) may exercise, perform and discharge such powers, duties and functions as are delegated to them 2 [by the council.] 3 [(5) Without prejudice to the provisions of section 68, every board shall constitute prescribed committees for the purpose of exercising the prescribed powers, discharging the prescribed duties and performing the prescribed functions. ] Inserted by Rajasthan Act No. 2 of 1990. Substituted by Rajasthan Act No. 26 of 1961. Substituted by Rajasthan Act No. 21 of 1974.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 73A--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) Where the population of a city is three lakhs or more, there shall be constituted by the Board, Wards Committees consisting of one or more wards within the territorial area of the municipality. (2) Each Wards Committee shall consist of- (a) members of the board representing the wards within the territorial area of the Wards Committee; and (b) such other members, not exceeding five who are not less than 25 years of age and who have special knowledge or experience in municipal administration to be nominated by the Board: Provided that a person shall be disqualified for being nominated, and for being, a member of the Wards Committee, if under the provisions of this Act or any other law for the time being in force, he would be disqualified for being elected as, and for being, a member: Provided further that a person nominated under this clause shall not have the right to vote in the meetings of the Wards Committee. (3) Where a Wards Committee consists of one ward, the member representing that ward in the municipality shall be the Chairperson of that Committee. (4)(a) The Wards Committee shall at its first meeting after its constitution under sub-section (1) and at its first meeting in the same month in each succeeding year shall elect where the Wards Committee consists of two or more wards, one of the members representing such wards in the municipality to be the Chairperson of the Committee. (b) The Chairperson shall hold office until his successor has been elected and shall be eligible for re-election. (5) the Chairperson shall vacate office as soon as he ceases to be a member. (6) In the event of the office of the Chairperson falling vacant before the expiry of his term, the Wards Committee shall, as soon as conveniently may be after the occurrence of the vacancy, elect new Chairperson in accordance with sub-section (4): Provided that a Chairperson so elected shall hold office so long only as the person in whose place he is elected would have held it if such vacancy had not occurred. (7) The duration of the Wards Committee shall be co-extensive with the duration of the municipality. (8) The Board shall by order define the functions and duties of the Wards Committee, the territorial area of such committees and the procedure to be adopted by such committee for transaction of its business. (9) The provisions of section 76 and 77 shall apply in relation to a Wards Committee as they apply to other committees. Inserted by Rajasthan Act 19 of 1994.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 73B--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) There shall be constituted in every Metropolitan Area a Metropolitan Planning Committee hereinafter in this section referred to "as the Committee" to prepare a draft development plan for the Metropolitan Area as a whole. (2) The Committee shall consist of such number of members as may be fixed by the State Government from time to time by notification in the Official Gazette. (3) In so fixing the total number of members of the Committee, the State Government shall specify the number respectively of the nominated members and elected members: Provided that not less than two thirds of the members of such committee shall be elected by, and from amongst, the elected members of the municipalities and Chairpersons of the Panchayats in the Metropolitan area in proportion to the ratio between the population of the municipal areas and of the panchayats in that area. (4) The elected members shall be chosen in such manner as may be prescribed. (5) The nominated members may consist of- (a) person representing the Government of India; (b) persons representing the State Government; and (c) persons representing such Organisations and Institutions as may be deemed necessary by the State Government. (6) The nomination of the persons referred to in sub-section (5) shall be made by the State Government, subject, however, to the condition that in case of persons representing Government of India or any Central Government Organisation or Institution prior concurrence of Government of India shall be obtained. (7) The nomination may be made in person or by virtue of the office persons hold under the Central Government or State Government or in the Organisations and Institutions aforesaid. (8) The Committee shall have- (i) the functions relating to planning and co-ordination for the Metropolitan area which may be assigned to it by the State Government; and (ii) Powers and functions as may be conferred on or delegated or entrusted to it by the State Government for carrying out the purposes of this Chapter. (9) The Chairperson of such Committee shall be chosen by the elected members from amongst themselves. (10) Every Metropolitan Committee shall in preparing the draft development plan have regard to- (i) the plans prepared by the municipalities and the panchayats in the Metropolitan area; (ii) matters of common interest between the municipalities and the panchayats, including co-ordinated spatial planning of the area, sharing of water and other physical and natural resources, the integrated development of infrastructure and environmental conservation; (iii) the overall objectives and priorities set by the Government of India and the State Government; and (iv) the extent and nature of investments likely to be made in the Metropolitan area by agencies of the Government of India and of the State Government and other available resources whether financial or otherwise. (11) The Chairpersons of every Metropolitan Committee shall forward the development plan, as recommended by such Committee, to the State Government. Explanation-For the purposes of this section, or those of section 73-C the term "Metropolitan Area" and "Panchayat" shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in article 243P of the Constitution of India.] Inserted by Rajasthan Act 19 of 1994.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 73C--> State(s): Rajasthan A District Planning Committee constituted under the provisions of section 121 of the Rajasthan Panchayati Raj Act, 1994 (Act No. 13 of 1994) shall be deemed to be the Committee constituted under Article 243ZD of the Constitution of India. Inserted by Rajasthan Act 19 of 1994 and further Substituted by Rajasthan Act No.22 of 1994.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 74--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, it shall be lawful for the board from time to time, by a resolution supported by not less than one-half of the whole number of members, to appoint, as members of any committee under sections 73, any persons who are not members, but who may in the opinion of such board possess special qualifications for serving on such committee, provided that the number of persons so appointed on any committee shall not exceed one-third of the total number of the members of such committee. (2) All the provisions of this Act relating to the duties, powers, liabilities, disqualifications and disabilities of members shall be applicable, so far as may be, to such persons.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 75--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) The chairman of the board, if a member of any committee, shall be ex-officio chairman thereof. (2) The vice-chairman of the board, if appointed a member of any committee of which the chairman is not a member, shall be ex- officio chairman thereof. (3) The Board may appoint a 1 [member as Chairman of any Committee] of which there is no ex-officio Chairman. (4) Every committee, of which there is an ex-officio chairman or a chairman appointed by the board, shall, at each meeting which such chairman does not attend, appoint from among its members a chairman of such meeting. (5) Every committee, of which there is no ex-officio chairman or chairman appointed by the board, shall appoint from time to time its own chairman from among its own members. Substituted by Rajasthan Act 19 of 1994.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 76--> State(s): Rajasthan 1 [(1) The meetings of a committee of a board shall be conducted in accordance with such procedure as may be prescribed.] (2) If the chairman of any committee has been absent from the municipality for a period exceeding fifteen days, the chairman or vice-chairman may, in his absence, call a meeting thereof. (3) Committees may meet and adjourn as they think proper but the chairman of a committee may, whenever he thinks fit, and shall, upon the written request of the chairman of the board or of not less than two members of the committee, and for a date not more than two days after the presentation of such request, call a special meeting of such committee. (4) No business shall be transacted at any committee meeting unless one-half of the members of the committee be present thereat. Substituted by Rajasthan Act No. 21 of 1974.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 77--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) Every committee shall conform to any instructions that may from time to time be given to it by the board. The board may, at any time, call for any extract from any proceedings of any committee, and any return, statement of account or report concerning or connected with any matter with which any committee has been authorised or directed to deal, and every such requisition shall without unreasonable delay, be complied with by the committee so called upon. (2) Every order passed by a committee appointed under section 73 1 [and section 73A] subject to revision by, and open to appeal to, the board in accordance with rules that may be framed by the board in this behalf. Inserted by Rajasthan Act 19 of 1994.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 78--> State(s): Rajasthan 1 [(1) Any powers, duties or executive functions which may be exercised, discharged or performed by or on behalf of the board may, subject to such restrictions, limitations and conditions as may be prescribed, be delegated to such committees as may be prescribed, without prejudice to the powers, duties and functions prescribed under section 73 2 [or under section 73A or Section 73B]. (2) When the office of a chairman becomes vacant and there is no vice-chairman to take over, the board shall 3 [at a meeting to be called in the prescribed manner,] delegate the powers, duties and executive functions of the chairman to such member of the board as it thinks proper to be exercised by him till a chairman is elected in accordance with the rules in force. Substituted by Rajasthan Act No. 21 of 1974. Inserted by Rajasthan Act 19 of 1994. Inserted by Rajasthan Act No. 20 of 1962.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 79--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) No disqualification of or, defect in the election, co-option or appointment of any person acting as member, or as the chairman or presiding authority of a general meeting or a committee appointed under this Act shall be deemed to vitiate any act or proceeding of the board or such committee as the case may be, in which such person has taken part. (2) Where a member or a chairman or a vice-chairman is declared, as the result of an election petition, not to have been duly elected he shall cease to act as such from such date but acts done by him till then in the execution of his office shall not be invalidated by reason of such declaration. (3) No resolution of a board or any committee appointed under this Act shall be deemed invalid on account of any irregularity in the service of notice upon any member; provided that the proceedings of the board or committee were not prejudicially affected by such irregularity. (4) Until the contrary is proved, every meeting of the board or of a committee appointed under this Act in respect of the proceedings where of a minute has been made and signed in accordance with this Act, shall be deemed to have been duly convened and held, and all the members at the meeting shall be deemed to have been duly qualified, and, where the proceedings are the proceedings of a committee, such committee shall be deemed to have been duly constituted and to have had the power to deal with the matters referred to in the minute. (5) During any vacancy in a board or committee, the continuing members may act as if no vacancy had occurred.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 80--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) Every board shall be competent, subject to the prescribed restrictions and conditions to lease, 2 [regularise] or otherwise transfer any movable or immovable property belonging to it, including municipal land as also any Government land and so far as is not inconsistent with the provisions and purposes of this Act and the rules made there under, to enter into and perform all such contracts as it may consider necessary or expedient in order to carry into effect the said provisions and purposes: Provided that- (i) no such lease, sale, transfer and contract shall be binding on a board unless it is in conformity with the provisions of this Act and the rules made there under; and (ii) no lease, sale, transfer of, or any other contract respecting any Government land shall be valid unless it is confirmed by the prescribed authority in the prescribed manner and on the prescribed conditions. Explanation-For the purposes of this section, the expression 'Government land' means any land- (a) which has become vested in a board under clause (e) of sub-section (2) of section 92: or (b) which is a Nazul land as defined in section 3 of the Rajasthan Land Revenue Act, 1956 (Rajasthan Act 15 of 1956); or (c) which may be placed at the disposal of a municipality by the State Government. (2) (a) The State Government or any officer authorised by it in this behalf may, for the purpose of satisfying as to the correctness, legality or propriety of any proposal to lease, sell or transfer any Government land made by or on behalf of a board or by any member, chairman, vice-chairman or officer of a board call for the relevant record, and may while doing so direct that pending the examination of the matter, the proposal to lease, sell or transfer of the Government land shall remain in abeyance and no action in furtherance thereof shall be taken till the decision of the State Government or of the authorised officer under sub-section (2) (b). (b) If after examination of the record and after giving to the persons interested in such proposal, a reasonable opportunity of being heard, the State Government or the officer authorised as a foresaid, is satisfied that the proposal to lease, sell or transfer the Government land is not in accordance with or is m contravention of the provisions of this Act, it may by order published in the Official Gazette, modify, cancel or rescind wholly or in part the proposal made for lease, sale or transfer of the Government land or any action or proceeding taken in pursuance thereof or may give any other direction as may be deemed proper. (3) Where in pursuance of any lease, sale, transfer or any other contract made by a board or by the chairman, vice-chairman or any member or officer of a board, in contravention of the provisions of this section, any person has entered into the possession of any municipal land or Government land, such person shall be deemed to be in unauthorised occupation within the meaning of the Rajasthan Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1965 (Rajasthan Act 2 of 1965) and shall be liable to eviction from such land and to all the liabilities as to the payment of rent or damages for use and occupation under that Act unless notwithstanding anything contained in that Act, such lease, sale or transfer or contract is confirmed by the State Government or the prescribed authority in the prescribed manner and on the prescribed conditions : Provided that where any such lease, sale, transfer or contract is not confirmed as aforesaid, the consideration, if any, received by the board, chairman, vice-chairman, member or officer of the board for such lease, sale, transfer or contract shall, as far as possible, be refunded to the person evicted from such land.] Substituted by Rajasthan Act No. 21 of 1974. Inserted by Rajasthan Act No. 21 of 1999.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 80-A--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) All lands which are deemed to have been placed at the disposal of a municipality under section 90-B of the Rajasthan Land Revenue Act, 1956 (Act No. 15 of 1956) upon resumption or surrender of tenancy rights and interest of khatedars thereof, as the case may be, shall be available for allotment or regularisation preferably to the persons having possession over such land or part thereof, as the case may be, on the basis of allotment made or patta given to them by a Housing Co-operative Society or on the basis of any other document of transfer of land to them either by tenant or any other person claiming through the tenant, whose tenancy rights have been resumed or surrendered, under the said provision, on such terms and conditions and subject to payment to the municipality of such charges or premium or both, as the case may be, and at such rates as may be prescribed by the State Government in this behalf: Provided that no allotment or regularisation of any land shall be made which has been duly earmarked for public utilities/services such as park, nursery, civil or military aviation, bus-stand, transport terminal, railways, public roads, highways, footpath, sewage lines, water supply, electricity supply, telephone lines, hospital, school, education institution, university, cremation ground, grave-yard and for such other purposes as the State Government may specify by notification in the Official Gazette. (2) The charges realised under sub-section (1) shall be credited to the Consolidated Fund of the State and the fund of the municipality as may be determined by the State Government. Inserted by Rajasthan Act No.21 of 1999, w.e.f. 17-6-1999.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 81--> State(s): Rajasthan Notwithstanding anything contained in the last preceding section, any person appointed by the State Government to carry any work into execution on behalf of a board may, subject to such control as the State Government may prescribe, make such contracts as are necessary for the purpose of carrying such work into execution to the extent of the sum provided for such work; and the board shall pay to the person so appointed such sums as may be required for the said purpose, to the extent aforesaid.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 82--> State(s): Rajasthan When any land or right in land whether within or without the limits of the municipality, is required for the purposes of this Act, the State Government may, at the request and on behalf of the board, proceed to acquire it under the provisions of the Rajasthan Land Acquisition Act, 1953 (Rajasthan Act XXIV of 1953) and on payment by the board to the State Government of the compensation awarded there under and of other charges incurred by the State Government in connection with such acquisition, the land or right, as the case may be, shall vest in the board.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 83--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) Except as herein otherwise provided no Chairman or member shall be personally liable in respect of any contract or agreement made, or for any expense incurred by, or on behalf of, the board, and the municipal fund shall be liable for and be charged with all costs in respect of any such contract or agreement and all such expenses. (2) Every member shall be liable for the misapplication of any money or other property owned by or vested in the board to which he has been a party and for any loss or waste of such money or property which has been caused or facilitated by his misconduct. The Chairman, the Vice-chairman, the executive officer or other officer or person to whom executive powers are conferred by or under this Act shall be liable for such loss, waste or misapplication, if it is a direct consequence of his neglect or has been caused or facilitated by his misconduct.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 84--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) Any person who has, directly or indirectly, by himself or his partner, any share or interests in any contract with, by or on behalf of, a board or in any employment with, under, by or on behalf of a board other than as a municipal officer or servant shall be disqualified for being an officer or servant of such board. (2) Any municipal officer or servant who shall acquire, directly or indirectly, by himself or his partner, any share or interest in any such contract or employment as aforesaid, shall cease to be a municipal officer or servant and his office shall become vacant. (3) Nothing in this section shall apply to any such share or interest in any contract or employment with, under, by or on behalf of a board as under sub-clauses (i), (ii) and (iv) of clause (c) of the proviso to section 26, it is permissible for a person to have without his being thereby disqualified for being a member.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 85--> State(s): Rajasthan (a) Any member who knowingly acquires directly or indirectly any share or interest in any contract or employment with, under, by, or on behalf of a board of which he is a member, not being a share, or interest such as, under section 26, it is permissible for a person to have, without being thereby disqualified for being member, and (b) Any municipal officer or servant who knowingly acquires, directly or indirectly, any share or interest in any contract or except in so far as concerns his own employment as municipal officer or servant, in any employment with, under, by or on behalf of a board of which he is an officer or servant, shall be liable, on conviction before a criminal court, to a fine which may extend to five hundred rupees.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 86--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) In the absence of a written contract to the contrary every sweeper or scavenger employed by the board shall be entitled to one month's notice before discharge or to one month's wages in lieu thereof, unless he is discharged for misconduct or, having been engaged for a specified term, is discharged upon the expiry thereof. (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section or in any other provision of this Act, every sweeper or scavenger who is discharged, dismissed or removed from employment under any provision of this Act may apply for setting aside the order of such discharge, dismissal or removal to such officer as the State Government may from time to time appoint in this behalf. (3) Should any sweeper or scavenger employed by the board, in the absence of a written contract authorising him to do so and without reasonable cause, resign his employment or absent himself from his duties without giving one month's notice to the board or neglect or refuse to perform his duties or any of them, he shall be liable on conviction by a Magistrate of the First Class to a fine not exceeding twenty-five rupees or imprisonment of either description which may extend to fifteen days. (4) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that, on and from a date to be specified in the notification, the provisions of sub-sections (1) and (3) with respect to sweepers or scavengers shall apply also to, any specified class of municipal servants whose functions intimately concerns the public health or safety.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 87--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) Every member, officer or servant, and every lessee of the levy of any municipal tax, and every servant or other employee of any such lessee shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (Central Act XLV of 1860). (2) The word "Government" in the definition of "legal remuneration" in section 161 of that Code shall, for the purposes of sub-section (1) of this section, be deemed to include a municipal board.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 88--> State(s): Rajasthan Every board shall make rules, not inconsistent with this act or with the rules made by the State Government under section 297,- (a) regulating 1 [XXX] the delegation of any of its powers or duties and the appointment and constitution of committees; 2 [(b) determining the staff of officers and servants to be employed by the board and the respective designations, duties, salaries, fees and absence or other allowances of such officers and servants; ] (c) generally for the guidance of its officers and servants in all matters relating to the municipal administration; (d) fixing the amount and nature of the security to be furnished by any officer or servant from whom it may be deemed expedient to require security; (e) determining the mode and conditions of appointing, 3 [transferring], punishing or dismissing any officer or servant and delegating to officers designated in the rules the powers to appoint, 4 [transfer], find, reduce, suspend or dismiss any officer or servant; (f) regulating the grant of leave to officers or servants, and fixing the remuneration to be paid to the person, if any, appointed to act for them whilst on leave; (g) authorising the payment of contributions, at such rates and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed in such rule, to any pension or provident fund which may be established by the board, or, with the approval of the board, by the said officers and servants; (h) prescribing, subject to the provisions of Chapter VII, the taxes under section 105 to be levied in the municipality for municipal purposes, the circumstances in which exemptions will be allowed, the conditions on which and the extent to which remissions may be granted and the system on which refunds are to be allowed and paid in respect of such taxes and the fees to be charged for licences or permissions granted and the times at which and the mode in which the same shall be levied or recovered or shall be payable and prescribing the fees for notices demanding payments due on account of any tax, leviable under section 104 or imposed under section 105 or section 106 or of any amount recoverable in accordance with Chapter VIII and for the execution of warrants of distress, and the rates to be charged for maintaining any livestock distrained, and designating the persons authorised to receive payment of any sums so leviable and the manner in which auctions of movable property shall be held; (i) prescribing the conditions subject to which sums due on account of any tax or, of costs in recovering any tax or on any other account may be written off as irrecoverable, and the conditions subject to which the whole or any part of any fee chargeable for distress may be remitted : Provided that- (i) no rule made by a board under this section shall have effect unless and until it has been approved by the State Government; (ii) no board shall, unless with the assent of the State Government, and otherwise than in accordance with the provisions of Chapter XIII or the rules made there under, dispense with the service of any officer transferred from the service of the Central or a State Government to the service of the board or employed partly by the State Government and partly by the board or finally dispense from the service of the board any officer transferred from the service of the board to the service of the State Government. Omitted by Rajasthan Act No. 21 of 1974. Substituted by Rajasthan Act No. 24 of 1974. Inserted by Rajasthan Act No. 4 of 1991 w.e.f. 28-12-90. Inserted by Rajasthan Act No. 4 of 1991 w.e.f. 28-12-90.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 89--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) Subject to the requirement of clause (i) of the proviso to section 88, every board may at any time for any sufficient reason suspend, modify, reduce the rate of, or abolish any existing tax, that has been or is deemed to have been or may be imposed under section 105. (2) The provisions of Chapter VII relating to the imposition of taxes under section 105 shall apply, so far as may be, to the suspension, modification, reduction or abolition of such tax and to the suspension, alteration or rescission of any rule prescribing such tax.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 90--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) Every board may, from time to time, make bye-laws not inconsistent with this Act- (a) for the regulation and inspection of markets, public places used for the sale of articles and slaughter houses, all places used by or for animals which are for sale or hire, or the produce of which is sold, and for the proper and cleanly conduct of business therein; for regulating the sale of fruits and vegetables in the municipal markets or other specified places; and for fixing the rents and other charges to be levied for the use of any of them which belong to the board; (b) prescribing the conditions on or subject to which, and the circumstances in which, and the areas or localities in respect of which, licences may be granted, refused, suspended or withdrawn for the use of any place not belonging to the board- (i) as a slaughter house; (ii) as a market or shop for the sale of animals intended for human food, or of meat, or offish, or as a market for the sale of fruits or vegetables; (iii) for any of the purposes mentioned in section 248; (iv) as a dairy, hotel, restaurant, eating-house, coffeehouse, sweet, meat-shop, bakery, camping-ground, sarai, dhobi-ghat, flour mill, sawmill, ice-candy factory, foodgrain-godown, boarding house, lodging-house (other than a students' hostel under public or recognised control) or for manufacturing ice or aerated water; (v) as a place for the preparation or manufacture of oil; (vi) for parching grain or Bengal grain on a large scale; or (vii) for any other purpose for which the taking out of a licence may be prescribed; and providing for the inspection and regulation of the conduct of business in any place used as aforesaid, so as to secure cleanliness therein or to minimise any injurious, offensive or dangerous effect arising likely to arise therefrom; (c) prohibiting the stalling or herding of horses, camels, donkeys, sheep or goats, otherwise than in accordance with such rules prescribed in such bye-laws in regard to the number thereof, and the places to be used for the purpose, as may be necessary to prevent danger to the public health; (d) (i) for the inspection of milk cattle; and prescribing and regulating the construction, dimensions, ventilation, lighting, cleansing, drainage and water-supply of dairies and cattle-sheds in the occupation of persons following the trade of dairymen or milk-sellers; (ii) for securing the cleanliness of milk-stores, milk-shops and vessels used by milk-sellers or butter-men for milk or butter; (e) for the registration of births, deaths and marriages, and the taking of a census within the municipality and for enforcing the supply of such information as may be necessary to make such registration or census effective; (f) regulating the disposal of the dead and of the carcasses of dead animals and the maintenance of all places for the purpose in good order and in a safe sanitary condition, due regard being had to the religious usages of the community or section of the community entitled to the use of such places for the disposal of the dead; (g) enforcing the supply of information as to any cases of dangerous disease, and carrying out the provisions of section 238; (h) enforcing the supply of such information by inhabitants of the municipality as may be necessary to ascertain their respective liabilities to any tax imposed therein; (i) the numbering and registration of any vehicle liable to taxation under this Act; (j) fixing octroi limits and stations and providing for the exhibition of tables of octroi; (k) conserving and preventing injury to sources and means of water-supply and appliances for the distribution of water whether within or without the limits of the municipality; and regulating all matters and things connected with the supply and use of water and the turning on or turning of and preventing the waste of water, and the construction, maintenance and control of municipal water works and of pipes and fittings in connection therewith, whether the property of the board or not; Explanation-Sources and means of water supply shall include private wells which are used by the public. (l) regulating the use of public bathing and washing places within municipal limits; (m) regulating sanitation and conservancy; (n) regulating the conditions for the construction, use and disposal of houses intended for the poor under clause (c) of section 101; (o) regulating the conditions on which permission may be given for the temporary occupation of, or the creation of temporary structures on public streets, or for projections over public streets; (p) regulating 'the structure and dimensions of plinths, walls, foundations, floors, roofs and chimneys of new buildings for the purpose of securing stability and the prevention of fires and for purposes of health; (q) regulating the erection or use of buildings for grain shops or grain stores, the use of sites for erection of buildings and, in localities intended for residential purposes, the erection or use of buildings for shops, market places, manufactories, places of public resort or for any other purpose; (r) preventing the erection of buildings without adequate provision being made for the laying out and location of streets; (s) ensuring the adequate ventilation of buildings by the provision and maintenance of sufficient open space either internal or external and of doors and windows and other means for securing a free circulation of air; (t) regulating, in any other particular not specially provided for in this Act, the construction, maintenance and control or drains, sewers, ventilation shafts, receptacles for dung and manure, cess-pools, water-closets, privies, latrines, urinals and drainage or sewage works of every description, whether the property of the board or not; (u) determining the information and plans to be required by the board under section 170; (v) prohibiting the transit of any vehicles of such form, construction, weight or size, or laden with such machinery or other unwieldy objects as may be deemed likely to cause injury to the roadway or to any construction thereon, or risk or obstruction to other vehicles or to pedestrians, along or over any street, except under such conditions as to time, mode of traction or locomotion, use of appliances for protection of the roadway, number of lights and assistants and other general precautions as may be prescribed, either generally in such bye-laws or in special licenses to be granted in each case upon such terms as to time of application and payment of fees therefor as may be prescribed in such bye-laws : Provided that no such bye-laws relating only to any particular street or portion of a street shall be deemed to be in force unless and until notice of such prohibition shall have been posted up by the board in conspicuous places at or near both ends of such street or portion of a street; (w) securing the protection of public parks, gardens and open spaces, vested in or under the control of the board from injury or misuse, regulating their management and the manner in which they may be used by the public, and providing for the proper behaviour of persons in them; (x) regulating or prohibiting any description of traffic in the streets and providing for the reduction of noise caused thereby; (y) rendering licenses necessary for the proprietors or drivers of vehicles or animals kept or plying for hire within the limits of the municipality, and fixing the fees payable for such licenses and the conditions on which they are to be granted and may be revoked; (z) limiting the rates which may be demanded for the hire of any carriage, cart or other conveyance or of any animals hired to carry loads or persons, or for the service of persons hired to carry loads or to impel or carry such conveyance, and limiting the loads which may be carried by any animal, or carriage, cart, or other conveyance, plying for hire, within the limits of the municipality; (aa) for the holding of fairs and industrial exhibitions within the municipality or under the control of the board and for the collection of fees under section 138; (ab) for the licensing, inspection and proper regulation of places of public resort, recreation or amusement; (ac) regulating the posting of bills and advertisements, and the position, size, shape and style of name-boards and sign-posts; (ad) rendering licenses necessary for hand-carts employed for transport, or hawking articles for sale, and for the persons using such hand-carts, and prescribing the conditions for the grant and revocation of such licenses; (ae) generally for the regulation of all matters relating to municipal administration; and every board may prescribe a fine not exceeding five hundred rupees for the infringement of any such bye-laws. (2) Every board shall, before making any bye-laws under this section, publish, in such manner as shall in its opinion be sufficient, for the information of persons likely to be affected thereby, a draft of the proposed bye-laws, together with a notice specifying a date on or after which the draft will be taken into consideration and shall, before making the bye-laws, receive and consider any objection or suggestion with respect to the draft which may be made in writing by any person before the date so specified. (3) No bye-laws made by a board shall take effect unless it is sanctioned by the State Government. (4) When any bye-law made by a board is submitted to the State Government for sanction, a copy of the notice published under sub-section (2) and of every objection or suggestion made thereto shall be submitted for the information of the State Government along with the said bye-law.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 91--> State(s): Rajasthan The rules and bye- laws for the time being in force shall be kept open for public inspection at the municipal office during office hours, and printed copies thereof shall be kept for sale at cost price.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 92--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) Every board may acquire and hold property both movable and immovable whether within or without the limits of the municipality. (2) All property of the nature hereinafter in this section specified and not being specially reserved by the State Government shall vest in and belong to the board, and shall together with all other property of whatsoever nature or kind not being specially reserved by the State Government, which may become vested in the board, be under its direction, management and control, and shall be held and applied by it as trustee subject to the provisions and for the purposes of this Act, that is to say- (a) all public city or town walls, gates, markets, slaughterhouses, manure, night-soil depots, and public buildings of every description, which have been constructed or are maintained out of municipal fund; (b) all public streams, tanks, reservoirs, cisterns, wells, springs, aqueducts, conduits, tunnels, pipes, pumps and water works, and all bridges, buildings, engines, works, materials and things connected therewith or appertaining thereto and also any adjacent land, not being private property, appertaining to any public tank or well; (c) all public sewers and drains and all sewers, drains, tunnels, culverts, gutters and water courses in, alongside, or under any street, and all works, materials, and things appertaining thereto as also all dust, dirt, dung, ashes, refuse, animal matter, filth, rubbish of any kind and dead bodies of animals collected by the board from the streets, houses, privies, sewers, cess-pools or elsewhere; (d) all public lamps, lamp-posts and apparatus connected therewith, or appertaining thereto; (e) such Government lands within a municipality as the State Government may by general or special order vest in the municipal board; (f) all public streets and the pavements, stones and other materials thereof, and also all trees, erections, materials, implements and things provided for such streets; and (g) all Government buildings and all private lands and buildings transferred to it by gift or otherwise. (3) The State Government shall be competent from time to time, by notification in the Official Gazette, to resume any Government land vested in a municipal board under clause (e) of sub-section (2),- (i) if such board is found upon inquiry to have mismanaged such land, or (ii) if such land is otherwise required by the State Government in the public interest; on such terms as the State Government may determine.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 93--> State(s): Rajasthan All moneys received by or on behalf of the board by virtue of this or any other Act, all taxes, tolls and other imposts, fines, fees and penalties, paid to or levied by it under this Act, all proceeds of land or other property sold by the board, and all rents accruing from its land or property, as also all interest, profits and other moneys accruing by gifts or transfers from the State Government or private individuals or otherwise shall constitute the municipal fund, and shall be held and dealt with in a manner similar to the property mentioned in the last preceding section : Provided that nothing in this section or in the last preceding section shall in any way affect any obligations accepted by or imposed upon any board by any declaration of trust executed by or on behalf of such board or by any scheme settled by order of the State Government for the administration of any trust.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 94--> State(s): Rajasthan The municipal fund and all property held by or vested in the board under this Act shall be applied, subject to the provisions of this Act, for the purposes specified in sections 98, 99 and 101 and for all other purposes for which, by or under this Act, or any other law for the time being in force, powers are conferred or duties imposed upon the board and with the previous sanction of the State Government for any other purposes for which the application of such property or fund is in the public interest: Provided that priority shall be given, in the order set forth below, to the following liabilities and obligations of a board- (a) liabilities and obligations arising from a trust legally imposed upon, or accepted by the board; (b) the repayment of and the payment of interest on, any loan incurred; (c) the payment of establishment charges, and the salary, allowances and pension of officers appointed by the State Government under sections 307 and 308; (d) any sum ordered to be paid from the municipal fund under sections 285 and 291 or under any other provision of this Act.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 95--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) In places where there is a Government treasury or sub-treasury or a bank to which the Government treasury business has been made over, the municipal fund shall be kept in such treasury, sub-treasury or bank. (2) In places where there is no such treasury or sub-treasury or bank the municipal fund may be kept in a post office savings bank account.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 96--> State(s): Rajasthan It shall be lawful for the board to deposit at interest, with the sanction of the State Government, in any Scheduled Bank any surplus funds in its hands which may not be required for current charges and, with the like sanction to invest such funds in public securities in the name of the board, and from time to time to dispose of such securities as may be necessary.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 97--> State(s): Rajasthan 1 [(1)] A board may, in pursuance of a resolution passed at a special general meeting and with the previous sanction of the State Government and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by the State Government as to security, the rate of interest and the repayment of principal and interest, borrow either from the State Government or from any person, any sum of money required for constructing any work of a permanent nature which it is required or empowered to undertake under the provisions of this Act. 2 [(2) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) or the rules made there under shall apply to grants or loans of money made of advanced to a board by any department, office or authority of the State Government or by any local authority or by any other institution towards and for the purpose of, the implementation, achievement and accomplishment of community development schemes or other plan schemes and a board may accept any such grant or loan which shall be regulated and governed by the terms on which and the conditions subject to which the same is made or advanced. Renumbered by Rajasthan Act No. 26 of 1961. Inserted by Rajasthan Act No. 26 of 1961.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 98--> State(s): Rajasthan It shall be the duty of every board to make reasonable provision for the following matters within the municipality under its authority, namely :- (a) lighting public streets, places and buildings; (b) watering public streets and places; (c) cleaning public streets, places and sewers, and all spaces, not being private property, which are open to the enjoyment of the public, whether such spaces are vested in the board or not, removing noxious vegetation and abating all public nuisances; (d) removing filth, rubbish, night-soil, odour, or any other noxious or offensive matter from privies, latrines, urinals, cesspools or other common receptacles for such matter in or pertaining to a building or buildings; (e) extinguishing fires and protecting life and property when fire occurs; (f) regulating offensive or dangerous trades or practices; (g) removing obstructions and projections in public streets or places and in spaces, not being private property which are open to the enjoyment of the public, whether such spaces are vested in the board or belong to the State Government; (h) securing or removing dangerous buildings or places and reclaiming un-healthy localities; (i) acquiring, maintaining, changing and regulating places for the disposal of the dead and of the carcasses of dead animals; (j) constructing, altering and maintaining public streets, culverts, municipal boundary marks, markets, slaughter-houses, drains, sewers, drainage-works, sewerage-works, baths, washing places, drinking fountains, tanks, wells, dams and the like; (k) constructing public latrines, privies and urinals; (l) obtaining a supply or an additional supply of water, proper and sufficient for preventing danger to the health of inhabitants from the insufficiency or unwholesomeness of the existing supply; (m) naming streets and numbering houses; (n) registering births and deaths; (o) public vaccination; (p) suitable accommodation for any calves, cows or buffaloes required within the municipality for the supply of animal lymph, (q) arranging for the destruction or the detention and preservations or such dogs within the municipality as may be dealt with under section 208 of this Act; (r) printing such annual reports on the municipal administration of the municipality as the State Government by general or special orders, requires the board to print; (s) paying the salary and the contingent expenditure on account of such police guards as may be required by the board for the purposes of this Act or for the protection of any municipal property and providing such accommodation as may be required by the State Government under the law in force relating to police; 1 [(ss) raising volunteer force with such functions and duties in relation to the protection of persons, the security of property and the public safety as may be prescribed;] (t) making arrangements for preparation of compost manure from night soil and rubbish; (u) establishing and maintaining cattle ponds; and 2 [(v) promoting population control, family welfare and small family norm. ] Added by Rajasthan Act No. 8 of 1963. Inserted by Rajasthan Act No. 13 of 1992.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 99--> State(s): Rajasthan Subject to such reasonable provision as may be made under section 98 every board shall make reasonable provision for the following special matters, namely- (a) providing special medical aid and accommodation for the sick in times of a dangerous disease and taking such measures as may be required to prevent the out-break or suppress and prevent the recurrence of the disease; (b) giving relief and establishing and maintaining relief works in times of famine or scarcity, to or for destitute persons within the limits of the municipality.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 100--> State(s): Rajasthan Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 98 and 99, the State Government may exempt any board from any of the provisions of those sections or may declare that in regard to any board any of the duties specified in the aforesaid sections shall be deemed to be discretionary duties within the meaning of section 101.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 101--> State(s): Rajasthan Boards may, at their discretion, provide out of the municipal property and fund, either wholly or partly, for- (a) laying out, whether in areas previously built upon or not, new public streets and acquiring land for that purpose, including land requisite for the construction of buildings or cartilages thereof, to abut on such streets; (b) constructing, establishing, maintaining, or contributing to the maintenance of public parks, gardens, libraries, museums, reading rooms, radio receiving stations, lunatic asylums, halls, offices, dharmashalas, rest houses, encamping, grounds and other public buildings and places; (c) constructing and maintaining, where necessary, suitable sanitary houses for the habitation of the poor and granting loans for the construction of such houses or for effecting necessary improvements connected therewith; (d) providing accommodation for any class of servants employed by the board or granting loans to such servants for construction of houses subject to the rules prescribed in this behalf; (e) planting and maintaining road side and other trees; (f) taking a census and granting rewards for information which may tend to secure the correct registration of vital statistics; (g) securing or assisting to secure suitable places for the carrying on of the offensive trades mentioned in section 248; (h) supplying, constructing and maintaining receptacles, fittings, pipes and other appliances whatsoever, on or for the use of private premises, for receiving and conducting the sewage thereof into sewers under the control of the board; (i) establishing and maintaining a farm or factory for the disposal of sewage; (j) providing music for the people; (k) the promotion of public health or infant welfare; (l) contribution towards any public fund raised for the relief of human suffering within or without the municipality; (m). by a resolution passed at a general meeting and supported by one-half of the whole number of members, any public reception, ceremony, entertainment, or exhibition within the municipality; (n) the organisation or maintenance of shops or stalls for the sale of necessaries of life during scarcity; (o) holding fairs and exhibitions; (p) supply of milk; (q) establishing labour welfare centres for its employees and subsidising the activities of any association, union or club of such employees by grant of loan for its general advancement; (r) organising or contributing to a municipal board union; (s) maintenance of ambulance service; (t) establishing and maintaining public hospitals and dispensaries and providing public medical relief; (u) providing facilities for anti-rabic treatment and meeting the expenses of indigent persons undergoing anti-rabic treatment within or outside the municipal limits; (v) housing and maintaining destitute orphans and cripples and maintaining maternity centres and child welfare clinics; (w) establishing and maintaining primary schools; 1 [(ww)(i) preparation of plans for economic development and social justice; (ii) the performance of functions and the implementation of the schemes that may be entrusted by the State Government to it, including those in relation to the matters listed in the Twelfth Schedule of the Constitution of India.] (x) any other matter not hereinbefore specifically named which is likely to promote education or the public health, safety or convenience or the advancement of economic condition of the inhabitants or the board or which is necessary for the carrying out of this Act, expenditure whereon is resolved by the board by the votes of not less than two-thirds of the whole number of members and with the approval of the State Government to be an appropriate charge on the municipal fund. Inserted by Rajasthan Act 19 of 1994.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 102--> State(s): Rajasthan When a board has entered into any arrangement, or made any promise, purporting to bind itself for a term of years or for an unlimited period, to make to any educational or charitable institution, a yearly contribution from the municipal property or fund it shall be lawful for the board, with the sanction of the State Government, to cancel such arrangement or promise or to discontinue or to diminish such yearly contribution, provided that it shall have given at least twelve months' notice of its intention so to do the manager or managers of such institution.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 103--> State(s): Rajasthan The management, control and administration of every public institution exclusively maintained out of municipal property and fund shall vest in the board by which it is so maintained.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 104--> State(s): Rajasthan 1 [(1)] Every board shall levy, at such rate and from such date as the State Government may in each case direct by notification in the Official Gazette and in such manner as is laid down in this Act and as may be provided in the rules made by the State Government in this behalf, the following taxes, namely- (1) a tax on the annual letting value of buildings or lands or both, situated within the municipality; 2 [(2) an octroi on goods and animals brought within the limits of the municipality for consumption or use or sale therein. ] Explanation 1-For the purpose of this sub-section meaning of the word 'Consumption' shall, with reference to goods and animals brought within the limits of the municipality, include the goods brought inside the area by any person to be delivered to another for using them up whether or not that other person is the ultimate consumer of the goods or animals so delivered in that area. Explanation II-For the purpose of this sub-section meaning of the word 'Use' shall, with reference to goods and animals brought within the limits of the municipality include the goods brought inside the area for use of any other person whether or not that other person ultimately consumes or uses up the goods or animals. Explanation III-For the purpose of this sub-section 'Sale' of goods or animals shall be deemed to have taken place within the municipal limits if these were brought by the seller within the municipal limits and a contract of sale as contemplated by section 5 of the Sale of Goods Act, 1930 has taken place between the buyer and seller within the municipal limits whether or not the delivery or payment deferred at the time of entering into the contract. Deferment of such delivery or payment or both shall be deemed to be an act of postponement of the delivery or payment or both as contemplated by the said section 5 of the said Act of 1930;] (3) a tax on professions and vocations : Provided that- (a) the tax under clause (1) shall not be levied- (i) on Kham houses, or 3 [(ii) on buildings or lands or both, of which annual letting value is less than one hundred and eighty rupees.] (b) the tax under clause (2) shall not be on a motor vehicle as defined in the Motor Vehicle Act, 1939 (Central Act IV of 1939) or any other mechanically propelled vehicle, and (c) the tax under clause (3) shall not be levied on artisans: Provided further that, upon a representation made to it by and at the request of a board, the State Government, if it is satisfied that circumstances exist which sufficiently provide the justification for a board not to levy, or to stop the levy of, any of the taxes mentioned in this section, may, by special order published in the Official Gazette, along with the reasons for making such order, permit the board not to levy, or to stop the levy of any such tax. (2) A direction under sub-section (1) may provide for the levy of taxes at different rates in different municipalities having regard to their varying local conditions and needs, and on the same considerations and by a like direction, the State Government may, from time to time-4 (i) vary 5 [uniformally] or differently in relation to different municipalities, the rates of taxes levied, or (ii) withdraw any tax levied by any municipality.] Re-numbered by Rajasthan Act No. 10 of 1976. Substituted by Rajasthan Act No. 13 of 1990. Substituted by Rajasthan Act No. 20 of 1962. Inserted by Rajasthan Act No. 10 of 1976. Substituted by Rajasthan Act No. 19 of 1978 w.e.f. 1-8-1978.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 104A--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in notifications issued by the State Government under section 104 of the Act, the Notification No. Tax/F.107 (7) DLB/5012 dated 9-1-91, published in Rajasthan Gazette Part IV(C) on 4th April, 1991, shall be deemed to have come into force on and from 18th December, 1969. (2) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in Notification No. GSR 101 dated 1st July, 1969, published in Rajasthan Gazette Ordinary part IV (C)(I) on 18th December, 1969, as amended by notifications published before 3rd December, 1992, Octroi on goods covered by expression "Anya Rasayan" i.e. Other Chemicals mentioned in item No.144 of the Schedule to the aforesaid notification, shall, on and from 18th December, 1969 to 2nd December, 1992 be leviable and shall be deemed to have been leviable at the rate of one and a half percent of the value and the entries of the aforesaid schedule to the aforesaid notification dated 18th December, 1969, shall be deemed to have been modified accordingly during the aforesaid period. Inserted by Raj .Act No.4 of 1996.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 105--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) Subject to any general or special orders of the State Government in this behalf, a board may impose and levy in the whole or any part of the municipality for which it is established all or any of the following taxes, namely- (i) a tax on vehicles and other conveyances plying for hire or kept within the municipality, (ii) a tax on dogs kept within the municipality, (iii) a tax on animals used for riding, driving, draught or burden when kept within the municipality, (iv) a toll on vehicles and other conveyances and on animals entering the municipality, (v) a tax on boats moored within the municipality, (vi) a scavenging tax, (vii) a tax for the cleansing of private latrines or privies. (viii) a general sanitary tax for the construction or maintenance or both of public latrines and for the removal and disposal of refuse. (ix) a lighting tax, (x) a water tax for water supplied by the board, which may be imposed in the form of a rate assessed on the annual letting value of buildings or lands or both or in any other form, (xi) a tax on trades and callings carried on within the municipality and deriving special advantages from, or imposing special burden on, municipal services, (xii) a tax on artisans, and (xiii) any other tax which the State Legislature has power to impose under the Constitution : Provided that- (a) no tax under clause (i) or clause (iv) shall be leviable in respect of any motor vehicle as defined in the Motor Vehicle Act, 1939 (Central Act IV of 1939) or any other mechanically propelled vehicle, (b) no tax under clause (i) or clause (iii) shall be leviable in respect of- (i) one bicycle and one horse kept by a member of the Rajasthan police force for the performance of his official duty, or (ii) horses being registered chargers of the officers of the Indian Army, (c) no toll under clause (iv) shall be leviable in respect of- (i) any vehicle or animal used for the conveyance 1 [XXX] of Government stores or of any other Government property or of any property in the custody of military or police officers on duty, or (ii) any vehicle or animal used for the passage of troops or of the military or police officers on duty or of any person in their custody, (d) no tax under clause (vi) or clause (vii) shall be imposed unless the board has undertaken house-scavenging or has made provision for the cleansing of private latrines or privies by manual labour or for conducting or receiving the sewage thereof into municipal sewers or into such place or places as may have been fixed, and (e) no tax under clause (x) shall be imposed on lands exclusively used for agricultural purposes. (2) Nothing in this section shall authorise or be deemed to authorise the imposition or levy of any tax which the State Legislature has no power under the Constitution to impose or levy in the State. Omitted by Rajasthan Act No. 10 of 1976.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 106--> State(s): Rajasthan A board may, in lieu of imposing separately all or any of the taxes mentioned in clauses (vi), (viii) and (x) of section 105 impose a consolidated tax as a rate on buildings or lands or both.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 107--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) None of the taxes specified in sections 104. 105 and 106 shall be leviable by a board in respect of any property belonging to or vested in it. (2) None of the taxes specified in clauses (1) and (2) of section 104 and in clauses (i), (iii), (iv) and (v) of sub-section (1) of section 105 shall be leviable in respect of any lands, buildings, goods, vehicles, conveyances, boats or animals belonging to or vested in the Central Government or the State Government: Provided that, so long as any such tax continues to be levied by the board on like properties of other persons, nothing in this sub-section shall prevent the board from levying that tax to which, immediately before the 26th day of January, 1950, any lands, buildings, goods, vehicles, conveyances, boats or animals of the Central Government were liable or treated as liable : Provided further that any land, building, goods, vehicle, conveyance, boat or animal belonging to or vested in the State Government shall be so exempt from payment of any such tax, if the same is used or intended to be used solely for public purposes and not for purposes of profit. (3) 1 [X X X] (4) The tax specified in clause (1) of section 104 shall not be leviable in respect of lands and buildings used solely as places of public worship or for religious or charitable purposes : Provided that such lands or buildings shall not be exempt from payment of the said tax, if any, trade or business is carried on therein or if in respect thereof rent or other income is derived, whether such rent or other income is or is not applied exclusively towards such places of public worship or towards such religious or charitable purposes. Explanation I-'Charitable purpose' includes relief of the poor, education and medical relief. Explanation II-When any portion of any land or building is exempt from payment of tax under this sub-section such portion shall be deemed to be a separate property for the purposes of the said tax. (5) The State Government may, if in its opinion reasonable grounds exist for so doing, grant and define, by notification in the Official Gazette, such exemptions in exceptional cases from payment of a tax leviable under section 104 or imposed under section 105 or under section 106 as it may consider necessary. Omitted by Rajasthan Act No. 10 of 1976.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 108--> State(s): Rajasthan A board, before imposing a tax under section 105, shall observe the following preliminary procedure- (a) it shall, by resolution passed at a general meeting, select for the purpose one or other of the taxes specified in section 105, and prepare a draft of the rules for the purposes of clause (h) of section 88 prescribing the tax and shall in such rules specify- (i) the classes of persons or of property or of both which the board proposes to make liable, and any exemptions which it proposes to make, (ii) the amount or rate at which the Board proposes to assess each such person or class of persons, (iii) in the case of a rate on buildings or lands or both, the basis for each class of the valuation on which such rate is to be imposed, and (iv) all other matters which the State Government may require to be specified therein, (b) when such resolution has been passed the board shall publish the draft rules so prepared with a notice in the form set forth in the second schedule, (c) any inhabitant of the municipality objecting to the imposition of the said tax or to the amount or rate proposed or to the classes of persons or property to be made liable thereto or to any exemption, proposed may, within one month from the publication of the said notice, send his objection in writing to the board and the board shall take all such objections into consideration, or shall authorise a committee to consider the same and report thereon, and, unless it decides to abandon the proposed tax, shall submit such objections with its opinion thereon and any modifications proposed in accordance therewith together with the notice and rules aforesaid, to such officer as may be appointed or authorised by the State Government in this behalf who may, after examining the proposals, either return them to the board for re-consideration or forward them to the State Government with such remarks as he thinks necessary.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 109--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) The State Government may either refuse to sanction the proposals and rules submitted or may return them to the board for further consideration, or if no objection which is in its opinion sufficient, was made to the proposed tax within one month from the publication of the said notice, may sanction the said proposals and rules either- (a) without modification, or (b) subject- (i) to such modifications not involving an increase of the amount to be imposed, or (ii) on such conditions as to the application within the municipality to any purpose or purposes of this Act, specified in such conditions of the whole or any part of the proceeds of such tax as it deems fit. (2) A copy of the order of sanction together with a copy of the rules as so sanctioned shall be sent to the board and thereupon the board shall by special resolution direct the imposition of the tax with effect from a date to be specified in the resolution and shall submit a copy of such resolution to the State Government.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 110--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) After the passing of the special resolution referred to in sub-section (2) of section 109, the board shall notify in the Official Gazette the imposition of the tax from the appointed date. (2) A notification of the imposition of a tax under sub-section (1) shall be conclusive proof that the tax has been imposed in accordance with the provisions of this Act: Provided that- (a) a tax leviable by the year- (i) shall not come into force except on one of the following dates viz., the first day of April, the first day of July, the first day of October, or the first day of January in the official year in which such notice is published, and (ii) if it comes into force on any day other than the first April, it shall be leviable by the quarter till the first day of April then next ensuing; (b) on or before the day on which a notice is issued under this section, the board shall publish such further detailed rules as may be required, and as may have been approved by the State Government under clause (1) of the proviso to section 88 prescribing the mode of levying and recovering the tax therein specified, and the dates on which it or the installments, if any, thereof shall be payable; (c) if the levy of a & tax, or of a special portion of a tax, has been sanctioned for a period only, the levy shall cease at the conclusion of that period, except so far as regards unpaid arrears which may have become due during that period.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 111--> State(s): Rajasthan All rules sanctioned under section 109 with all modifications subject to which the sanction is given, shall be published by the board in the municipality for which they are prescribed, together with a notice reciting the sanction and the date and serial number thereof.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 112--> State(s): Rajasthan The procedure for abolishing or altering a tax imposed under section 105 shall, so far as may be, be the procedure prescribed by sections 108 to 111 for its imposition.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 113--> State(s): Rajasthan If it shall at any time appear to the State Government on complaint or otherwise that any tax, levied by a board under section 105, in unfair in its incidence or that the levy thereof or of any part thereof is contrary or obnoxious to the interest of the general public, the State Government may require the said board within such period as it shall fix in this behalf to take measures for removing any defect or objection which appear to it to exist in the said tax or in the method of assessing or collecting the same, and if, within the period so fixed, such requirement is not carried into effect to the satisfaction of the State Government it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, suspend the levy of the tax or of any part thereof, until such time as the defect or objection is removed or may abolish or reduce such tax.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 114--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) For assessing the tax on the annual letting value of buildings or lands or both situated within the municipality, every board shall appoint, with the sanction of the State Government, an assessor who shall prepare an assessment list in such form and in such manner as may be laid down in rules made by the State Government in that behalf. (2) The board may also assign to the assessor any other work which in its opinion he can perform without prejudice to his duties as assessor.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 115--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) On the requisition of the assessor the owner or occupation of any building or land or both referred to in sub- section (1) of section 114 shall, within such reasonable period as shall be specified in the requisition be bound- (i) to furnish a true return to the best of his knowledge or belief and subscribed with his signature- (a) as to the name and place of abode of the owner or occupier or of both, and (b) as to the dimensions of such building or land or both and the annual letting value and other particulars thereof, and (ii) to give such information as may be requisite for determining the person from whom the tax is primarily leviable under section 125. (2) If such owner or occupier fails or refuses to comply with the requisition within the period specified therein, then, without prejudice to any other action that may be taken against him under any other provision of this Act, the assessor shall, after making such inquiry as he considers necessary, determine the annual letting value of such building or land or both, to the best of his judgment and assess the tax payable thereon.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 116--> State(s): Rajasthan When the assessment list has been prepared the assessor shall give public notice thereof, and of the place and time where the list or a copy thereof may be inspected; and every person claiming to be either owner or occupier of the property included in the list and any agent of such person shall be at liberty to inspect the list and to make extracts there from without charge.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 117--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) The assessor shall at the time of the publication of such assessment list give public notice of a date, not less than one month thereafter, when the revising authority will proceed to revise the valuation and assessment; and in all cases in which any property is for the first time assessed or the assessment is increased, the assessor shall also give notice thereof to the owner or the occupier of the property, if known and if the owner or occupier of the property is not known he shall affix the notice in a conspicuous place on the property. (2) The revising authority to whom objections under sub-section (1) may be made shall be the board or any committee to which the board may delegate this function or an officer of the State Government to whom with the permission of the State Government the board may delegate this function. (3) All objections to the valuation and assessment shall be made to the assessor before the time fixed in the notice, by application in writing, stating the grounds on which the valuation and assessment are disputed, and all applications so made shall be registered in a book to be kept by the assessor for the purpose. (4) The revising authority shall, after allowing the applicant an opportunity of being heard in person or by agent:- (a) investigate and dispose of the objections; (b) cause the result thereof to be noted in the book kept under sub-section (3); and (c) cause any amendment necessary in accordance with such result to be made in the assessment list. (5) When all objections made under this section have been disposed of and all amendments required by sub-section (4) have been made in the assessment list, the said list shall be authenticated by the revising authority. (6) The list so authenticated shall be deposited in the municipal office, and shall be open for inspection during office hours to all owners and occupiers of properties specified therein, or to the agents of such persons and a public notice that it is so open shall be forthwith published. (7) Subject- (a) to such alterations as may thereafter be made therein under the provisions of the next following section, and (b) to the result of any appeal made under section 139, the entries in the list so authenticated and deposited shall be accepted as conclusive evidence- (i) for the purposes of all municipal taxes, on the annual letting value or other valuation of all buildings and lands to which such entries respectively refer, and (ii) for the purpose of the tax on the annual letting value of buildings or lands or both or the amount of such tax leviable thereon throughout the official year to which such list relates.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 118--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) The board may at any time alter or amend the assessment list by inserting or altering an entry in respect of any property, such entry having been omitted from or erroneously made in the assessment list through fraud, accident or mistake or in respect of any building constructed, altered, added to or reconstructed in whole or in part, where such construction, alteration, addition or reconstruction has been completed after the preparation of the assessment list, after giving notice to any person interested in the alteration or amendment of the list of a date, not less than one month from the date of service of such notice, before which any objection to the alteration or amendment should be made. (2) An objection made by any person interested in any such alteration, or amendment before the time fixed in such notice, and in the manner provided by sub-section (3) of section 117 shall be dealt with in all respects as if it were an application under the said section. (3) An entry or alteration or amendment made under this section shall, subject to the provisions of section 139, have the same effect as if it had been made in the case of a building constructed, altered, added to or reconstructed, on the day on which such construction, alteration, addition or reconstruction was completed or on the day on which the new construction, alteration, addition or reconstruction was first occupied, whichever first occurs or, in other cases, on the earliest day in the current official year on which the circumstances justifying the entry or alteration existed, and the tax or the enhanced tax, as the case may be. shall be levied in such year in the proportion which the remainder of the year after such day bears to the whole year.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 119--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) It shall not be necessary to prepare a new assessment list every year. Subject to the condition that every part of the assessment list shall be completely revised not less than once in every three years the assessor may adopt the valuation and assessment contained in the list for any year, which such alterations as may be deemed necessary for the year immediately following. (2) The provisions of sections 116, 117 and 118 shall however be applicable every year as if a new assessment list has been completed at the commencement of the official year.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 120--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) When a building is built, re-built or enlarged, the owner shall give notice thereof to the board within one month from the date of completion of such building, re-building or enlargement, or from the date of the occupation of such building, whichever date happens first. (2) If any person fails to give the notice required by sub-section (1), the board may impose upon him such penalty not exceeding fifty rupees or ten times the amount of the tax payable on the said building or enlargement for a period of three months, whichever is greater, as the board may think fit.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 121--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) Whenever the title of any person primarily liable for the payment of a tax imposed on the annual letting value of a building or land or both, is transferred, the person whose title is so transferred and the person to whom the same shall be transferred shall give notice of such transfer in writing to the board. (2) In the event of the death of any person primarily liable as aforesaid the person to whom the title of the deceased is transferred as heir or otherwise shall give notice of such transfer to the board.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 122--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) The notice to be given under the last preceding section shall be in the form either of the third schedule or the fourth schedule, as the case may be, and shall state clearly and correctly all the particulars required by the said form. (2) On receipt of any such notice, the board may, if it thinks necessary, require the production of the instrument of transfer, if any, or of a copy thereof.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 123--> State(s): Rajasthan Whenever such transfer comes to the knowledge of the board either through such notice or otherwise and after such enquiry as may be necessary, the name of the transferee shall be substituted in the municipal registers for that of the person primarily responsible.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 124--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) Every person primarily liable for the payment of the tax imposed on the annual letting value of a building or land or both, who transfers his title thereto without giving notice of such transfer to the board as aforesaid, shall continue to be liable for the payment of all taxes from time to time payable in respect thereof until he gives such notice, or until the transfer shall have been recorded in the registers of the board. (2) Nothing in this section shall however be held to diminish the liability of the transferee for the said tax or to affect the prior claim of the board on the premises conferred by section 160, for the recovery of the tax due thereupon.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 125--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) Every tax imposed on the annual letting value of buildings or lands or both shall be leviable primarily from the actual occupier of the property assessed to such tax, if he is the owner of the building or land or both, or holds them on a building or other lease from the State Government or from the board, or on a building lease from any person. (2) Subject to the provisions contained in sub-section (1), the tax shall be primarily leviable as follows, namely :- (a) if the property is let, from the lessor; (b) if the property is sub-let, from the superior lessor; (c) if the property is unlet, from the person in whom the right to let the same vests : Provided that, on failure to recover any sum due on account of such tax from the person primarily liable, such portion of the sum may be recovered from the occupier of any part of the building or lands in respect of which it is due as bears, to the whole amount due the same ratio which the rent annually payable by such occupier bears to the aggregate amount of rent so payable in respect of the whole of the said building or land, or to the aggregate amount of the letting value thereof, if any, stated in the authenticated assessment list, whichever of those two amounts is the grater : Provided further that, for any sum paid by, or recovered from, any occupier who is not primarily liable under this section he shall be entitled to get credit in account with the person primarily liable.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 126--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) Where any building or land which is assessed to a tax on the annual letting value thereof and payable by the year or by instalments has remained vacant and unproductive of rent throughout the year or a portion of the year for which the tax is leviable or throughout the period in respect of which an instalment is payable the board shall remit or refund not less than two-thirds of the amount of the tax or instalment, as the case may be : Provided that no such remission shall be granted unless notice in writing of the fact of the building or land being vacant and unproductive of rent has been given to the board, and that no remission or refund shall take effect for any period previous to the day of the delivery of such notice. (2) When any such building or land as aforesaid- (a) has been vacant and unproductive of rent for any period of not less than sixty consecutive days, or (b) consists of separate tenements one or more of which has or have been vacant unproductive of rent for any such period as aforesaid, or (c) is wholly or substantially demolished or destroyed by fire or otherwise deprived of value, the board may remit or refund such portion, if any, of the tax or instalment as it may think equitable. (3) The burden of proving the facts entitling any person to claim relief under this section shall be upon him. (4) For the purposes of this section a building or land shall be deemed to be productive of rent if let to a tenant who has continuing right of occupation thereof, whether it is actually occupied by such tenant or not.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 127--> State(s): Rajasthan A board may instead of imposing a water tax, or where a water tax has been imposed in individual cases, instead of levying a tax imposed in respect of the supply of water belonging to the board to or for use in connection with any private lands or buildings,- (a) fix at rates not exceeding such as shall be specified in the rules in force under section 88, charges for such supply according to the quantity used as ascertained by measurement (b) arrange with any person, on his application, to supply on payment, periodically or otherwise, water belonging to the board in such quantities or for such purposes, whether domestic or ornamental or for trade, manufacture or otherwise, on such terms and subject to such conditions as it shall fix by agreement with such persons : Provided that- (i) the meter, connection-pipes and all other works necessary for and incidental to such supplies and all future repairs, extensions and alterations of such works shall be under the control of the board, and the expense thereof shall, so far as is not inconsistent with the rules or bye-laws of the board, be defrayed by the persons liable in respect of such supply, and (ii) all such supplies of water shall be, and shall be deemed to have been, granted, subject to all such conditions as to the limit or stoppage thereof, and as to the prevention of waste or misuse, as are prescribed in the bye-laws for the time being in force under section 90.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 128--> State(s): Rajasthan When the board has made provision for the cleansing of any factory, hotel, club or group of buildings or lands used for any one purpose or under one management, it may instead of levying in respect thereof any tax under section 105, fix a special tax, and the dates and other conditions for the periodical payments thereof, which shall be determined either,- (i) in accordance with the rules for the time being in force under section 88, or (ii) by written agreement with the person who would have been, otherwise liable for the tax; provided that, in fixing the amount due regard shall be had to the probable cost to the board for the service to be rendered.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 129--> State(s): Rajasthan In the case of the tax on vehicles or animals used for riding, driving, draught or burden and kept within the municipality, the board may compound with the keeper of any livery stable or of horses or vehicles kept for sale and hire for the payment of a lumpsum, for any period not exceeding one year at a time, in lieu of any amount which such keeper would otherwise have been liable to pay on account of such tax.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 130--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) Every person bringing into or receiving from beyond the octroi limits of a municipality any article on which octroi is payable shall, when required by an officer authorised in this behalf by the board and so far as may be necessary for ascertaining the amount of tax chargeable- (a) permit that officer to inspect, examine, weigh and otherwise deal with the article, and (b) communicate to that officer any information and exhibit to him any bill, invoice or document of a like nature which he may possess relating to the article. (2) If any person bringing into, or receiving from beyond the octroi limits of a municipality in which octroi is leviable, any conveyance or package shall refuse, on the demand of an officer authorised by the board in this behalf, to permit the officer to inspect the contents of the conveyance or package for the purpose of ascertaining whether it contains any article in respect of which octroi is payable, the officer may cause the conveyance or package to be taken without unnecessary delay before a magistrate or such officer of the board as the State Government appoints in this behalf by name or office who shall cause the inspection to be made in his presence.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 130A--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) Every person bringing within the Municipal limits goods liable to payment of octroi shall produce such goods at the octroi post and shall declare whether goods are intended,- (i) for consumption or use or sale within the municipal limits, or (ii) for immediate transportation outside the municipal limits, or (iii) for temporary detention within the municipal limits and eventual transportation outside municipal limits. (2) Declaration under clause (i) of sub-section (1) maybe oral and declarations under clauses (ii) and (iii) of sub-section (1) shall be in writing in the form No.1 appended to the Rajasthan Municipalities (Octroi) Rules, 1962 and shall be tendered to the incharge of the octroi outpost at the time of bringing the goods within the municipal limits, and if no such declaration is made, the goods shall be deemed as having been brought within the municipal limits for consumption or use or sale therein. Inserted by Rajasthan Act 17 of 2000 [20-11-2000].
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 131--> State(s): Rajasthan Every officer demanding octroi by the authority of the board shall tender to every person introducing or receiving any article on which the tax is claimed a bill specifying the article taxable, the amount claimed and the rate at which the tax is calculated.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 132--> State(s): Rajasthan If goods passing into a municipality are liable to the payment of octroi, every person who with intention to defraud the board causes or abets the introduction of or himself introduces or attempts to introduce within the octroi limits of the said municipality, any such goods for which the octroi due on such introduction has neither been paid nor tendered shall, on conviction before a magistrate, be punishable with fine which may extend to ten times the value of such octroi or to fifty rupees whichever may be greater.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 133--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) The board, if it thinks fit instead of requiring payment of octroi due from any mercantile firm or public body to be made at the time when the articles in respect of which it is leviable are introduced within the octroi limits of the municipality, may at any time direct that an account current shall be kept on behalf of the board of the octroi so due from any such firm or body as the board specifies in this behalf. (2) Every such account shall be settled at intervals not exceeding one month, and such firm or public body shall make such deposit or furnish such security as the board or any committee or officer authorised by it in this behalf shall consider sufficient to cover the amount which may at any time be due from such firm or body in respect of such dues. Every amount so die at the expiry of any such interval shall, for the purposes of Chapter VIII, be deemed to be, and shall be recoverable in the same manner as, an amount claimed on account of any tax recoverable under the said Chapter: 1 [Provided that no mercantile firm or public body shall be eligible for such facility of keeping account current and of deferred payment in respect of any goods or articles brought within the limits of the municipality if it has failed to make any declaration or submit any return, account or statement in any form prescribed or required otherwise at the entry point by the incharge of the octroi post and all acts, actions or orders of the board purporting to grant any such facility to any mercantile firm or public body or purporting to grant otherwise may benefit in terms of this section shall be deemed to be honest and shall always be deemed to have not been made. ] Inserted by Raj .Act No. 13 of 1990.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 134--> State(s): Rajasthan Every board imposing any toll under this Act shall cause to be kept at each place, where such toll is to be collected, a table showing the amounts leviable in all cases provided for in the rules, including the terms, if any, on which the liability to pay such toll may be compounded by periodical payments, and it shall be the duty of every person authorised to demand payment of a toll or show such table on the request of any person on whom such demand is made.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 135--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) The board may compound for a period not exceeding one year at a time with any person for a sum to be fixed in accordance with a scale approved by the board and to be paid monthly, quarterly or half-yearly in advance in lieu of all tolls payable in respect of any vehicle belonging to such person and issue a pass for the free admittance of the vehicle within the limits of the municipality; provided that the sum charged shall not be less than one-half of the amount which such person would have been liable to pay, if the vehicle had to pay toll once every day during the period for which the pass is issued. (2) Every sum claimed by the board as a lump sum payable under sub-section (1) shall, for the purposes of Chapter VIII, be deemed to be, and shall be recoverable in the same manner as, an amount claimed on account of any tax recoverable under the said Chapter.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 136--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) It shall be lawful for the board to lease annually the levy of any toll that may be imposed under this act by public auction. (2) Where any toll has been leased under this section, any person employed by the lessee to collect such toll or the lessee himself shall, subject to the conditions of the lease, have the powers referred to in sub-section (1) and (2) of section 137; provided that no article distrained may be sold except under the orders of the board.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 137--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) In case of non-payment of demand of any octroi or of any toll leviable by a board, the person appointed to collect such octroi or toll may seize any article on which the octroi is chargeable, or any vehicle on which the toll is chargeable or any part of its burden, which is of sufficient value to satisfy the demand, and may detain the same. He shall thereupon give the person in possession of the vehicle or article seized a list of the property together with a written notice in the form of the seventh schedule. (2) When any article seized is subject to speedy and natural decay or when the expense of keeping it together with the amount of the octroi or toll chargeable is likely to exceed its value, the person seizing such article may inform the person in whose possession it was that it will be sold at once, and shall sell it or cause it to be sold accordingly unless the amount of octroi or toll demanded be forthwith paid. (3) If, at any time before the sale has begun, the person whose property has been so seized tenders at the municipal office the amount of all expenses incurred and of the octroi or toll payable the board shall forthwith release the property seized. (4) If no such tender is made, the property may be sold by public auction and the proceeds of such sale shall be applied in payment of such octroi or toll and the expenses incidental to the seizure, detention and sale. (5) The surplus, if any, of the sale proceeds shall be credited to the municipal fund, and may, on application made to the board in writing within six months next after the sale, be paid to the person in whose possession the property was when seized, and, if no such application is made, shall be the property of the board.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 138--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) When any licence is granted by the board under this Act or when permission is given by it for making any temporary erection or for putting up any projection, or for the temporary occupation or any public street or other land vested in the board, the board may charge a fee for such licence or permission. (2) The board may charge a higher fee by way of penalty for any erection or projection, or for the use or occupation of any public street or other land vested in the board by any person without its permission or licence. Such fee shall be leviable irrespective of any other penalty or liability to which the person liable to pay the same may be subject under any other provision of this Act or any other law for the time being in force. The rates of such higher fees shall be determined by rules. (3) The board may also charge such fees as may be fixed by bye- laws under clauses (a), (q) and (r) of sub-section (1) of section 90, for the use of any such places mentioned in that sub-section as belong to the board. (4) It shall be lawful for the board to lease the levy of any fee that may be imposed under sub-section (3) by public auction. (5) When any fee has been leased under sub-section (4), any person employed by the lessee to collect such fees or the lessee himself may, subject to the conditions of the lease, collect the fee or expel from the place for the use of which the fee is payable any person who is liable to pay the fee but refuses to pay it.
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959_Section 139--> State(s): Rajasthan In the case of a tax assessed upon the annual letting value of buildings or lands or both an appeal against an order passed under sub-section (4) of section 117. or under sub-section (2) of section 118, and, in the case of any other tax, an appeal against an assessment, or any alteration of an assessment, and, in all cases in which no appeal has been made as aforesaid an appeal against a notice of demand under section 149, may be made to the Collector or such order officer as may be empowered by the State Government in this behalf. 
