Rajasthan Panchayati Raj (Second Amendment) Act, 2015_Section Preamble--> State(s): Rajasthan An Act further to amend the Rajasthan Panchayati Raj Act, 1994. Be it enacted by the Rajasthan State Legislature in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India, as follows:-
Rajasthan Panchayati Raj (Second Amendment) Act, 2015_Section 1--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) This Act may be called the Rajasthan Panchayati Raj (Second Amendment) Act, 2015. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on and from 20th December, 2014.
Rajasthan Panchayati Raj (Second Amendment) Act, 2015_Section 2--> State(s): Rajasthan In section 19 of the Rajasthan Panchayati Raj Act, 1994 (Act No. 13 of 1994), hereinafter referred to as the principal Act,- (i) in clause (q), for the existing punctuation mark ":" appearing at the end, the punctuation mark ";" shall be substituted; (ii) after the clause (q), so amended and before the existing proviso, the following new clauses shall be inserted, namely:- "(r) in case of a member of a Zila Parishad or a Panchayat Samiti, has not passed secondary school examination of the Board of Secondary Education, Rajasthan or of an equivalent Board; (s) in case of a Sarpanch of a Panchayat in a Scheduled Area, has not passed class V from a School; and (t) in case of a Sarpanch of a Panchayat other than in a Scheduled Area, has not passed class VIII from a School:"; and (iii) after the Explanation-II, the following new Explanation shall be added, namely:- "Explanation-III.- For the purpose of the clauses (s) and (t) of this section- (i) "Scheduled Area" means the Scheduled Area as referred to in clause (1) of article 244 of the Constitution of India; and (ii) the word "School" shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause (n) of section 2 of the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009 (Central Act No. 35 of 2009).".
Rajasthan Panchayati Raj (Second Amendment) Act, 2015_Section 3--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) The Rajasthan Panchayati Raj (Second Amendment) Ordinance, 2014 (Ordinance No. 2 of 2014) is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, all things done, actions taken or orders made under the principal Act as amended by the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done, taken or made under the principal Act as amended by this Act. Principal Secretary to the Government. 
