Rajasthan Rent Control Act, 2001_Section Preamble--> State(s): Rajasthan An Act to provide for control of eviction from, letting of, and rents for, certain premises in the State of Rajasthan and matters incidental thereto. Be it enacted by the Rajasthan State Legislature in the Fifty-second Year of the Republic of India, as follows:-
Rajasthan Rent Control Act, 2001_Section 1--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) This Act may be called the Rajasthan Rent Control Act, 2001. 1 (2) It shall extend in first instance to such of the municipal areas which are comprising the District Headquarters in the State and later on to such of the other municipal areas having a population exceeding fifty thousand as per 1991 Census as the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify from time to time. (3) It shall come into force with effect from such date, as the State Government may be notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. Received the assent to the President on the 25th day of February. 2003
Rajasthan Rent Control Act, 2001_Section 2--> State(s): Rajasthan In this Act, unless subject or context otherwise requires, (a) "Amenities" includes supply of water and electricity, passages, staircase, natural light, lavatories, lifts, conservancy, sanitary services, telephone services, T.V. Cable services or the like: (b) "Appellate Rent Tribunal" means Appellate Rent Tribunal constituted under Section 19: (c) "landlord" means any person who for the time being is receiving or is entitled to receive the rent of any premises, whether on his own account or as an agent, trustee, guardian or receive or be entitled to receive the rent, if the premises were let to a tenant: (d) "lease" means a lease as defined under the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 (Central Act No. 4 of 1882); (e) "Municipal Area" means the municipal area as defined under the Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959 (Act No. 38 of 1959): (f) "premises" means- (a) any land not being used for agricultural purposes: and (b) any building or part of a building (other than a farm building) let or intended to be let for use as a residence or for commercial use for any other purpose, including,- (i) the gardens, grounds, godowns, garages and out-houses, if any, appurtenant to such building or part, (ii) any furniture supplied by the landlord for use in such building or part, (iii) any fittings affixed to, and amenities provided in, such building or part for the more beneficial enjoyment there-of, and (iv) any land appurtenant to and let with any such building or part, but does not include a room or other accommodation in a hotel, dharamshala, inn, sarai. lodging house, boarding house or hostel: Explanation - In absence of a contract to the contrary, the top of the roof shall not form part of the premises let out to a tenant: (g) "Rent Tribunal" means a Rent Tribunal constituted under section 13; (h) "senior citizen" means a citizen of India who has attained the age of sixty five years or more: (i) "tenant" means- (i) the person by whom or on whose account or behalf rent is, or but for a contract express or implied, would be payable for any premises to his landlord including the person who is continuing in its possession after the termination of his tenancy otherwise than by an order or decree for eviction passed under the provisions of this Act: and (ii) in the event of death of the person referred to in sub- clause (i),- (a) in case of premises let out for residential purposes, his surviving spouse, son, daughter, mother and father who had been ordinarily residing with him in such premises as member of his family up to his death: (b) in case of premises let out for commercial or business purposes, his surviving spouse, son, daughter, mother and father who had been ordinarily carrying on business with him in such premises as member of his family upto his death: and (j) "Tribunal" means an Appellate Rent Tribunal or a Rent Tribunal, as the case may be.
Rajasthan Rent Control Act, 2001_Section 3--> State(s): Rajasthan Nothing contained in Chapter II and III of this Act shall apply,- (i) to the new premises built or completed after the commencement of this Act and let out through a registered deed in which date of completion of such premises is mentioned: (ii) to the new premises existing at the commencement of this Act, if let out after such commencement for a period of five years or more through a registered deed and the tenancy is not terminable before expiry of its duration at the option of the landlord: (iii) to the new premises let out for residential purposes before or after the commencement of this Act, the monthly rent whereof is- (a) rupees seven thousand or more, in the case of the premises situated in the municipal area of Jaipur city; (b) rupees four thousand or more, in the case of premises let out at places situated in other municipal areas comprising the Divisional Headquarters Jodhpur, Ajmer. Kota, Udaipur and Bikaner: (c) rupees two thousand or more, in the case of premises let out at places situated in other municipal areas to which this Act extends for the time being; (iv) to any premises belonging to or let out by the Central Government or the State Government or a local authority; (v) to any premises belonging to or let out by any body corporate constituted by a Central Act or a Rajasthan Act: (vi) to any premises belonging to a Government company as defined under section 617 of the Companies Act. 1956 (Central Act No. 1 of 1956): (vii) to any premises belonging to the Devasthan Department of the State, which are managed and controlled by the State Government or to any property of a Wakf. registered under the Wakf Act, 1995 (Central Act No. 43 of 1995): (viii) to any premises belonging to such religious, charitable or educational trust or class of such trusts as may be specified by the State Government by notification in the Official Gazette: (ix) to any premises belonging to or vested in a University established by any law for the time being in force: (x) to any premises let to banks, or any Public Sector Undertaking or any Corporation established by or under any Central or State Act or multinational companies, and private limited companies or public limited companies having a paid up share capital of rupees one crore or more: Explanation - For the purpose of this clause the expression "bank" means,- (i) The State Bank of India constituted under the State Bank of India Act. 1955 (Central Act No. 23 of 1995): (ii) a subsidiary bank as defined in the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959 (Central Act No. 38 of 1959) : (iii) a corresponding new bank constituted under section 3 of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act. 1970 (Central Act No. 5 of 1970) or under section 3 of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertaking) Act, 1980 (Central Act No. 40 of 1980): (iv) any other bank, being a scheduled bank as defined in clause (e) of section 2 of the Reserve Bank of India Act. 1934 (Central Act No. 2 of 1934): and (xi) to any premises let out to a citizen of a foreign country or to an embassy. High Commission. Legation or other body of a foreign State, or such international organisation as may be specified by the State Government by notification in the Official Gazette.
Rajasthan Rent Control Act, 2001_Section 4--> State(s): Rajasthan The rent payable for any premises shall, subject to other provisions of this Act, be such as may be agreed upon between the landlord and the tenant and it shall not include the charges payable for amenities which may be agreed upon separately: and shall be payable accordingly.
Rajasthan Rent Control Act, 2001_Section 5--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) Unless agreed otherwise every tenant shall pay the rent by the fifteenth day of the month next following the month for which the rent is payable. (2) Every tenant who makes a payment on account of rent shall be entitled to obtain a receipt of the amount paid duly signed by the landlord or his duly authorised agent. (3) A tenant may make payment to the landlord or his duly authorised agent, by any of the following methods:- (a) by personal payment, by cash, by cheque or Bank Draft, or (b) by payment in the bank account as may be specified by the landlord, or (c) by remitting through postal money order. (4) The landlord shall disclose to the tenant his bank account number and name of the bank in the same municipal area, in the rent agreement or by a notice sent to him by registered post, acknowledgment due.
Rajasthan Rent Control Act, 2001_Section 6--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) Not-withstanding anything contained in any agreement, where the premises have been let out before the commencement of this Act, the rent thereof shall be liable to be revised according to the formula indicated below:- (a) Where the premises have been let out prior to 1st January, 1950, it shall be deemed to have been let out on 1st January, 1950 and the rent payable at that time shall be liable to be increased at the rate of 7.5% per annum and the amount of increase of rent shall be merged in such rent after ten years. The amount of rent so arrived at shall again be liable to be increased at the rate of 7.5% per annum in similar manner up to the year of commencement of this Act: (b) Where the premises have been let out on or after 1st January, 1950, the rent payable at the time of commencement of the tenancy shall be liable to be increased at the rate of 7.5% per annum and the amount of increase of rent shall be merged in such rent after ten years. The amount of rent so arrived at shall again be liable to be increased at the rate 7.5% per annum in similar manner upto the year of commencement of this Act. Illustration - If the rent was Rs. 100/- per month on 1st January, 1950, it shall become Rs. 175/- per month on 1st January. 1960. It shall become Rs. 306.30 per month on 1st January, 1970 and Rs. 536.60 per month on 1st January, 1980. (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) where the period of ten years for merger of increase of rent under sub- section (1), is not completed up to the year of the commencement of this Act. the rent at the rate of 7.5% per annum shall be increased up to the year of the commencement of this Act and amount of increase of rent shall be merged in rent. (3) The rent arrived at according to the formula given in subsection (1) and (2) shall, after completion of each year from the year of commencement of this Act, again be liable to be increased and paid at the rate of 5% per annum and the amount of increase of rent shall be merged in such rent after ten years. Such rent shall further be liable to be increased at similar rate and merged in similar manner till the tenancy subsists. (4) The rent revised as per formula given under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) shall be payable, after the commencement of this Act, from the date agreed upon between the landlord and the tenant or where any petition is field in a Rent Tribunal, from the date of filing of such petition.
Rajasthan Rent Control Act, 2001_Section 7--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) In the absence of any agreement to the contrary, the rent of the premises let out after the commencement of this Act shall be liable to be increased at the rate of 5% per annum and the amount of increase of rent shall be merged in such rent after ten years. Such rent shall further be liable to be increased at the similar rate and merged in similar manner till the tenancy subsists. (2) Any agreement for increase of rent in excess of 5% per annum shall be void to that extent.
Rajasthan Rent Control Act, 2001_Section 8--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) A landlord may let out the premises for residential purposes for a limited period not exceeding three years. (2) In such cases the landlord and the proposed tenant shall submit a joint petition before the Rent Tribunal for permission to enter into the limited period tenancy and for grant of certificate for recovery of possession. (3) The rent tribunal shall grant permission immediately and issue certificate for recovery of possession of such premises executable on expiry of the period mentioned in the certificate. However, such permission shall not be granted for more than three times for the same premises: Provided that the certificate for recovery of possession issued in this section shall lapse if petition for execution thereof has not been filed before the Tribunal within six months from the date such certificate becomes executable.
Rajasthan Rent Control Act, 2001_Section 9--> State(s): Rajasthan Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law or contract but subject to other provisions of this Act, the Rent Tribunal shall not order eviction of tenant unless it is satisfied that- (a) the tenant has neither paid nor tendered the amount of rent due from him for four months: Provided that the ground under this clause shall not be available to the landlord if he has not disclosed to the tenant his bank account number and name of the bank in the same municipal area, in the rent agreement or by a notice sent to him by registered post, acknowledgment due: Provided further that no petition on the ground under this clause shall be filed unless the landlord has given a notice to the tenant by registered post, acknowledgment due, demanding arrears of rent and the tenant has not made payment of arrears of rent within a period of thirty days from the date of service of notice; Explanation - For the purposes of this clause, the rent shall be deemed to have been tendered when the same is remitted through money order to the landlord by properly addressing the same; or (b) the tenant has willfully caused or permitted to be caused substantial damage to the premises; or (c) the tenant has without written permission of the landlord made or permitted to be made any construction which has materially altered the premises or is likely to diminish the value thereof: or (d) the tenant has created a nuisance or has done any act which is inconsistent with the purpose for which he was admitted to the tenancy of the premises or which is likely to affect adversely and substantially the landlords interest therein; or (e) the tenant has assigned, sub-let or otherwise parted with the possession of the whole or part of the premises without the written permission of the landlord; Explanation - If it is established that some person other than the tenants is in the exclusive possession of the whole or part of the premises, it shall be presumed that the tenant has either sub-let or parted with the possession of the whole or part of the premises, as the case may be: or (f) the tenant has renounced his character as such or denied the title of the landlord and the latter has not waived his right or condoned the conduct of the tenant; or (g) the premises were let out for residential purposes but have been put to commercial use wholly or partially; or (h) the premises were let out to the tenant for residential purposes by reason of his being in the service or employment of the landlord and the tenant has ceased to be in such service or employment; or (i) the premises are required reasonably and bonafide by the landlord for the use or occupation of himself or his family or for the use or occupation of any person for whose benefit the premises are held: Provided that where decree of eviction from any premises is sought by the landlord under clause (i), he shall be prohibited from letting out the same to any other person within a period of three years and in case the premises are let-out, the tenant shall be entitled for restoration of possession on a petition moved by him before the Rent Tribunal and the Rent Tribunal shall dispose of such petition expeditiously and the procedure as laid down in section 16 shall mutatis mutandis apply: or (j) the tenant has built or acquired vacant possession of or has been allotted suitable premises adequate for his requirement: or (k) the premises have not been used without reasonable cause for the purpose for which they were let for a continuous period of six months immediately preceding the date of the petition: or (l) the landlord has been required by any authority under any law to abate the over crowding of the premises: or (m) the landlord required the premises in order to carry out any building work,- (i) at the instance of the State Government or a local authority in pursuance of an improvement scheme or development scheme: or (ii) because the premises have become unsafe or unfit for human habitation.
Rajasthan Rent Control Act, 2001_Section 10--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Act or any other law for the time being in force or in any contract or usage,- (i) a landlord shall, on a petition being filed in this behalf in the Rent Tribunal, be entitled to recover immediate possession of a residential premises, if he,- (a) is or was a member of any armed forces or paramilitary forces of the Union and aforesaid petition is filed within one year prior to or subsequent to the date of retirement, release or discharge, as the case may be, or within a period of one year from the date of commencement of this Act, whichever is later;, (b) is or was an employee of the Central Government or the State Government or local bodies or State owned corporations and files the aforesaid petition within a period of one year prior to or subsequent to the date of his retirement or within a period of one year from the date of the commencement of this Act, whichever is later; (c) has become a senior citizen and files the aforesaid petition after the expiry of three years from the date of letting out of premises; (ii) a dependent legal representative of a landlord, who was a member of any armed forces or paramilitary forces of the Union and has died during the course of his employment, shall, on a petition being filed in this behalf in the Rent Tribunal, be entitled to recover immediate possession of the residential premises, if the petition is filed by him within a period of one year after the death of such member or within a period of one year from the date of commencement of this Act, whichever is later: (iii) after the death of a landlord, his window shall, on a petition being filed in this behalf in the Rent Tribunal, be entitled to recover immediate possession of the residential premises, if the petition is filed by her within a period of one year from the date of death of her husband. (2) Where the landlord has let out more than one premises, the petition under sub-section (1) shall be maintainable in respect of one rented premises only to be chosen by the landlord and petition under sub-section (1) shall be maintainable only if the petitioner is not residing in his own premises in the same municipal area. (3) Where a landlord, after letting out his premises on the ground floor, has incurred such permanent disability due to which he is unable to use staircase and requires the ground floor premises for his own residence, he shall, on a petition being failed in this behalf in the Rent Tribunal, be entitled to recover immediate possession of such ground floor premises on his furnishing a certificate from duly constituted Medical Board of a Government Hospital about such a permanent disability and on satisfying the Rent Tribunal that he has no suitable residential premises of his own on ground floor in his possession in the same municipal area: Provided that if tenant is prepared to vacate ground floor premises in exchange of premises in occupation of landlord on the upper floor, the Rent Tribunal shall pass order of immediate possession in favour of landlord only on the condition that the landlord shall make available proportionately equal portion of the premises in his occupation on the upper floor to the tenant on such terms and conditions as may be fixed by the Rent Tribunal. (4) Where the landlord has recovered possession of the premises under this section, he shall be prohibited from letting out the same to any other person within a period of three years and in case the premises are let out, the tenant shall be entitled for restoration of possession on an application moved by him before the Rent Tribunal and the Rent Tribunal shall dispose of such application 16 shall mutatis mutandis apply. Explanation - For the purpose of this section, the expression "landlord" shall mean the owner of the residential premises.
Rajasthan Rent Control Act, 2001_Section 11--> State(s): Rajasthan If any tenant is dispossessed by landlord from the rented premises without his consent otherwise than by due process of law, he may within thirty days from the date of knowledge of such dispossession, file a petition before the Rent Tribunal for restoration of possession thereof.
Rajasthan Rent Control Act, 2001_Section 12--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) The tenant or any person claiming recovery of possession under section 11 of this Act shall file a petition before the Rent Tribunal and such petition shall be accompanied by affidavits and documents if any, upon which, tenant or person entitled to recover possession wants to reply. (2) The Rent Tribunal upon filing of petition under sub-section (1) shall issue notice accompanied by copies of petition, affidavits and documents fixing a date not later than twenty one days from the date of service of notice requiring the landlord to submit reply accompanied by affidavits and documents, if any on which the landlord relies. The service of notice shall be effected through process server of the Tribunal or the Civil Court as well as by registered post, acknowledgment due. Notice duly served by any of these modes shall be treated as sufficient service. (3) The landlord may submit his reply, affidavits and documents after serving copies of the same on the petitioner within a period not exceeding ten days from the date of service of notice. The petitioner may file rejoinder, if any, after serving copy of the same on the landlord, within a period of seven days from the date of service of reply. The Rent Tribunal shall thereafter fix a date of hearing, which shall not be later than fifteen days from the date fixed for filing of rejoinder. The petition shall be disposed of within a period of ninety days from the date of service of notice on the landlord. (4) The Rent Tribunal, after holding such summary enquiry, as it deems necessary to determine whether petitioner has been illegally dispossessed from the rented premises without his consent otherwise than by due process of law. Shall dispose of the petition by ordering immediate restoration of possession of such premise to the tenant. The Tribunal may also award adequate compensation to the tenant for the hardship and inconvenience caused to him looking to the facts and circumstances of the case which shall be payable by landlord and the Tribunal shall issue a certificate for recovery of immediate possession.
Rajasthan Rent Control Act, 2001_Section 13--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) The State Government shall constitute such number of Rent Tribunals and at such places as may be deemed necessary by it, by notification in the Official Gazette. (2) Where two or more Rent Tribunals are constituted for any area, the State Government may, by general or special order, regulate the distribution of business among them. (3) A Rent Tribunal shall consist of one person only (hereinafter referred to as the Presiding Officer) to be appointed by the High Court. (4) No person shall be eligible to be appointed as President Officer of the Rent Tribunal unless he is a member of Rajasthan Judicial Service having ten years experience as such. (5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3), the High Court may authorise the President Officer of one Rent Tribunal to discharge the functions of the President Officer of another Rent Tribunal also.
Rajasthan Rent Control Act, 2001_Section 14--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) The landlord may seek revision of rent under section 6 or section 7 by submitting a petition before the Rent Tribunal accompanied by affidavits and documents, if any. (2) On filing of such petition the Rent Tribunal shall issue notice accompanied by copies of petition, affidavits and documents to the opposite party fixing a date not later than thirty days from the date of issue of notice. The opposite party may file reply, affidavits and documents after serving the copies of the same on the petitioner, within a period not exceeding thirty days from the date of service of notice. The service of notice shall be effected through process server of the Tribunal or Civil Court as well as by registered post. acknowledgment due. Notice duly served by any of these methods shall be treated as sufficient service. (3) The petitioner may thereafter file rejoinder, if any. after serving the copy to the opposite partly, within a period not exceeding fifteen days from the date of service of the reply. (4) Rent Tribunal shall thereafter fix a date of hearing, which shall not be later than ninety days from the date of service of notice on the tenant. (5) The Rent Tribunal, during the course of such hearing, may hold such summary inquiry as it deems necessary and fix the rent as per formula laid down in section 6 or section 7 and issue a recovery certificate indicating the date from which such rent shall be payable. The petition shall be disposed of within a period of one hundred and fifty days from the date of service of notice on the tenant.
Rajasthan Rent Control Act, 2001_Section 15--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) The landlord or any person claiming possession shall file a petition before the Rent Tribunal and such petition shall be accompanied by affidavits and documents, if any, upon which landlord or person claiming possession wants to reply. (2) The Rent Tribunal, upon filing of petition under sub-section (1), shall issue notice accompanied by copies of petition, affidavits and documents, if any, fixing a date not later than thirty days from the date of issue of notice requiring the tenant to submit reply accompanied by affidavits and documents. if any, on which the tenant relies. The service of notice shall be effected through process server of the Tribunal or Civil Court as well as by registered post, acknowledgment due. Notice duly served by any of these methods shall be treated as sufficient service. (3) The tenant may submit his reply, affidavits and documents after serving the copies of the same to the petitioner, within a period not exceeding forty five days from the date of service of notice. (4) The petitioner may thereafter file rejoinder if any, after serving copy to the opposite party, within a period of thirty days from the date of service of reply. (5) The Rent Tribunal shall thereafter fix a date of hearing which shall not be service of notice on the tenant. The petition shall be disposed of within a period of two hundred and forty days from the date of service of notice on the tenant. (6) The Rent Tribunal during the course of such hearing may hold such summary inquiry as it deems necessary and decide the petition. The Rent Tribunal may also make efforts for conciliation or settlement of dispute between the parties. (7) Where the Rent Tribunal decides the petition in favour of the landlord, it shall issue a certificate for recovery of possession from the tenant. (8) The certificate issued under sub-section (7) shall not be executable for a period of three months from the date of decision.
Rajasthan Rent Control Act, 2001_Section 16--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) The landlord or any person claiming immediate possession shall file petition before the Rent Tribunal and such petition shall be accompanied by affidavits and documents upon which landlord or person entitled to seek immediate possession wants to reply. (2) The Rent Tribunal, upon filing of petition under sub-section (1), shall issue notice accompanied by copies of petition, affidavits and documents, fixing a date not later than thirty days from the date of service of notice requiring the tenant to submit reply accompanied by affidavits and documents. if any. on which the tenant relies. The service of notice shall be effected through process server of the Tribunal or Civil Court as well as by registered post. acknowledgment due. Notice duly served by any of these methods shall be treated as sufficient service. (3) The tenant may submit his reply, affidavits and documents after serving the copies of the same on the petitioner within a period not exceeding thirty days from the date of service of notice. The petitioner may file rejoinder, if any, after serving copy of the same on the tenant within a period of fifteen days from the date of service of reply. (4) The Rent Tribunal shall thereafter fix a date of hearing which shall not be later than ninety days from the date of service of notice on the tenant. The petition shall be disposed of within a period of one hundred and fifty days from the date of service of notice on the tenant. (5) The Rent Tribunal, during the course of such hearing, may hold such summary enquiry as it deems necessary to determine whether the petitioner is a landlord as categorised under sub- section (1) or sub-section (3) of section 10 and on hearing satisfied that the petitioner belongs to any of the categories of the landlord specified under sub-section (1) or sub-section (3) of section 10. shall dispose of the petition within a period of one hundred and twenty and shall issue a certificate for recovery of immediate possession from the tenant. (6) The certificate issued under sub-section (5) shall not be executable for a period of three months from the date of decision.
Rajasthan Rent Control Act, 2001_Section 17--> State(s): Rajasthan The Rent Tribunal while finally deciding a petition in which it is not proceeding ex-parte against any party shall fix a date, beyond one month but not beyond two months of its decision, for the appearance of the parties to the petition before the Appellate Rent Tribunal to which appeal against its final order lies and the parties to the petition shall appear before such Appellate Rent Tribunal on such date to receive the notices of the appeal, if any, field against the final order of the Rent Tribunal. The date so fixed shall be mentioned in the final order passed by the Rent Tribunal and copy of the final order shall, immediately after the pronouncement of the order, be delivered to the party against whom the same is made and if the final order is partly against one party and partly against other party and both the parties may prefer appeal against the final order, the copy of the final order shall be delivered to both the parties. The coy of the final order shall bear the endorsement under the seal of the Presiding Officer that the same is being supplied under this provision and party preferring an appeal may file such a copy along with his appeal.
Rajasthan Rent Control Act, 2001_Section 18--> State(s): Rajasthan Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, in the areas to which this Act extends, only the Rent Tribunal and no Civil Court shall have jurisdiction to hear and decide the petitions relating to disputes between landlord and tenant and matters connected therewith and ancillary thereto, filed under the provisions of this Act: Provided that Rent Tribunal shall, in deciding such petitions to which provisions contained in Chapter II and III of this Act do not apply, have due regard to the provisions of Transfer of Properties Act, 1882 (Act No. 4 of 1882), the Indian Contract Act, 1872 (Act No. 9 of 1872), or any other substantive law applicable to such matter in the same manner in which such law would have been applied had the dispute been brought before a Civil Court by way of suits: Provided further that nothing contained in this Act shall be deemed to empower the Rent Tribunal to entertain a petition involving such dispute between landlord and tenant to which provisions of the Rajasthan Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1964 (Act No. 2 of 1965) and the Rajasthan Premises (Requisition and Eviction) Ordinance. 1949 apply. (2) Where the petition only for recovery of unpaid rent or arrears of rent is filed, the time schedule and procedure enumerated in section 14 shall mutatis mutandis apply to such petition. (3) Where the petition for recovery of possession is filed in respect of the premises or tenancies to which the provisions of Chapter II and III of this Act do not apply, the time schedule and procedure enumerated in section 15 shall mutatis mutandis apply to such petition. (4) A petition shall be instituted before the Rent Tribunal, within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the premises is situated.
Rajasthan Rent Control Act, 2001_Section 19--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) The State Government shall constitute such number of Appellate Rent Tribunals and at such places as may be deemed necessary by it, by notification in the Official Gazette. (2) Where two or more Appellate Rent Tribunals are constituted for any area, the State Government may, by general or special order, regulate the distribution of business amount them. (3) An Appellate Rent Tribunal shall consist of one person only (hereinafter referred to as the President Officer of the Appellate Rent Tribunal) to be appointed by the High Court. (4) No person shall be eligible to be appointed as Presiding Officer of the Appellate Rent Tribunal unless he is a member of the Rajasthan Higher Judicial Service having not less than seven years experience as such. (5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3), the High Court may authorise the President of one Appellate Rent Tribunal to discharge the functions of the Presiding Officer of the another Appellate Rent Tribunal also. (6) From every final order passed by the Rent Tribunal, an appeal shall lie to the Appellate Rent Tribunal, within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the premises is situated and such an appeal shall be filed within a period of thirty days from the date of final order along with copy of such final order. (7) The Appellate Rent Tribunal, upon filing an appeal under subsection (6), shall serve notice, accompanied by copy of appeal, on the respondent on the date fixed by the Rent Tribunal under section 17 for the appearance of the parties before it. If the respondent fails to appear on the date so fixed before the Appellate Rent Tribunal, he may be proceeded against ex parte. In case the final order under section 17 was passed in ex parte proceedings against any party, the Appellate Rent Tribunal shall issue notice, accompanied by copy of appeal, fixing a date not later than thirty days, requiring the respondent to appear before it on the date so fixed and service of such a notice shall be effected through process server of the Tribunal or Civil Court as well as by the registered post, acknowledgment due and notice duly served by any of these methods shall be treated as sufficient service. Where, however, the Appellate Rent Tribunal, otherwise considers it necessary so to do in the interest of justice in the facts of the case, it may issue notice of appeal to the respondent in the manner indicated above. (8) The Appellate Rent Tribunal shall, thereafter, fix a date of hearing which shall not be later than forty five days from the date of service of notice of appeal on the respondent and the appeal shall be disposed of within a period of one hundred and eighty days from the date of service of notice of appeal on the respondent. (9) Where the Appellate Rent Tribunal considers it necessary in the interest of arriving at a just and proper decision, it may allow filing of additional affidavits or documents at any stage of the proceedings in appeal. (10) The Appellate Rent Tribunal may in its discretion pass such interlocutory order, during the pendency of the appeal, as it may deem fit. (11)(a) While deciding the appeal, the Appellate Rent Tribunal may after recording reasons therefore.- (i) Confirm, vary, set aside, reverse or modify the order passed by a Rent Tribunal: or (ii) if necessary in the interest of justice, remand the case to the Rent Tribunal along with such direction as it may deem fit. (b) The Appellate Rent Tribunal shall issue appropriate recovery certificate according to the decision rendered by it. (c) The decision of the Appellate Rent Tribunal shall be final and no further appeal or revision shall lie against its order. (12) No the application of any of the parties and after notice to the parties and after hearing such of them as have desired to the heard, or of its own motion without such notice, the Appellate Rent Tribunal may at any stage transfer any case from one Rent Tribunal to any other Rent Tribunal for for disposal. (13) Where any case has been transferred under sub-section (12), the Rent Tribunal which has thereafter to try or dispose of such case may, subject to any special direction in the order of transfer, proceed from the stage at which it was transferred. Explanation - The expression "final order" referred to in sub- section (6) shall mean an order by which any proceeding pending before the Rent Tribunal is finally disposed of.
Rajasthan Rent Control Act, 2001_Section 20--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) The Rent Tribunal shall, on application of any party, execute, in the manner prescribed, a final order or any other order passed under this Act by adopting any one or more of the following modes, namely:- (a) Attachment and sale of the movable or immovable property of the opposite party: (b) Arrest and detention of the opposite party: (c) attachment of any one or more bank accounts of the opposite party and satisfaction of the amount of order to be paid from such account: (d) attachment of salary and allowance of a Government Servant or employee of any nationalised bank. local authority, corporation. Government company: (e) appointing any advocate as Commissioner on such remuneration as may be fixed or deputing any officer of the Tribunal or local administration or local body for execution of the order. (f) delivery of possession of the premises to the applicant. (2) The Tribunal may, in order to execute the final order or any other order passed under this Act require the help from the local administration or local body or the police. (3) If the tenant does not vacate the premises within three months of the date of issue of certificate for recovery of the possession, he shall be liable, from the date of issue of certificate for recovery of possession to pay mesne profits at the rate of 2 times the rent in case of premises let out for residential purposes, at the rate of 3 times the rent in case of premises let out for commercial purposes and at the rate of 3 times the rent in case certificate for recovery of immediate possession has been issued under section 16. (4) The Rent Tribunal shall conduct the execution proceedings in relation to a final order or any other order passed under this Act in summary manner and dispose of the application for execution made under this section within forty five days from the date of service of notice on opposite party. Explanation - Filing of an appeal or other proceeding against the order of issue of certificate for recovery of possession or immediate possession will not save the tenant from his liability to pay mesne profits, at the rates specified under sub-section (3), unless specifically ordered otherwise by the Appellate Rent Tribunal or the Court before which such an order is under challenge and if the order of issue of recovery certificate is finally maintained, the tenant shall be liable to pay mesne profits at the rates specified under sub-section (3) from the date on which the recovery certificate was initially issued.
Rajasthan Rent Control Act, 2001_Section 21--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) In every case before the Rent Tribunal and the Appellate Rent Tribunal the evidence of a witness shall be given by affidavit. However, the Rent Tribunal or the Appellate Rent Tribunal, where it appears to it that it is necessary in the interest of justice to call a witness for examination or cross- examination and such witness can by produced, may order attendance for examination or cross-examination of such a witness. (2) The documents filed before the Rent Tribunal by the petitioner shall be distinctly marked by him as Ex-1, Ex-2 and so on in the red ink and the documents filed by the respondent shall be similarly distinctly marked by him as Ex-A1, Ex-A2 and so on in red ink and in the affidavits the documents shall be referred by these exhibit marks and signatures or other parts of the documents referred to in the affidavits shall be distinctly marked by the party filing the document as A to B or C to D and so on in red ink. (3) The Rent Tribunal and the Appellate Rent Tribunal shall not be bound by the procedure laid down by the Code of Civil Procedure. 1908 (Central Act No. 5 of 1908), but shall be guided by the principal of natural justice and subject to other provisions of this Act or the Rules made there under and shall have powers to regulate their own procedure, and for the purpose of discharging their functions under this Act they shall have the same powers as are vested in a Civil Court under the Code of Civil Procedure. 1908 (Central Act No. 5 of 1908) while trying a suit or an appeal in respect of following matters, namely:- (a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath; (b) requiring the discovery and production of documents: (c) reviewing its decision: (d) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents: (e) dismissing petition for default or deciding it ex-parte: (f) setting aside any order of dismissal of any petition for default or any order passed by it ex-parte: (g) bringing legal representatives on record: and (h) any other matter as may be prescribed. (4) Rent Tribunal shall not grant any adjournment without written application and recording the reasons therefore in writing. (5) Any proceeding before the Rent Tribunal or Appellate Rent Tribunal shall deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of section 193 and 228 and for the purpose of section 196 of the Indian Penal Code. 1860 (Central Act No. 45 of 1860) and the Rent Tribunal or the Appellate Rent Tribunal shall be deemed to be a Civil Court for the purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Central Act No. 2 of 1974).
Rajasthan Rent Control Act, 2001_Section 22--> State(s): Rajasthan Every petition or appeal so far as possible shall be in the model form specified in Schedule A and Schedule B. and every recovery certificate shall be in the model form specified in Schedule C. of this Act.
Rajasthan Rent Control Act, 2001_Section 23--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) No landlord either himself or acting through any person or any person purporting to act on his behalf, shall discontinue or withhold the amenities enjoyed by the tenant in respect of the premises let out to him. The landlord may, however, discontinue or withhold any amenity with the permission of the Rent Tribunal and the Rent Tribunal shall grant such permission if it is satisfied that the tenant has not paid the charges in respect of the amenity, which he was liable to pay. (2) On the petition of the landlord for permission to discontinue or withhold the amenities or on the petition of the tenant for restoration of the amenities, the Rent Tribunal shall issue notices to the other party and after hearing the parties it shall pass such orders as it may deem fit. (3) During the pendency of the inquiry under this section, the Rent Tribunal may pass such interim orders as it may deem fit. (4) The Rent Tribunal shall conduct the proceedings under this section in a summary manner and dispose of any application made under this section by the landlord or tenant within sixty days from the date of presentation of petition.
Rajasthan Rent Control Act, 2001_Section 24--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) In the absence of any written agreement, essential repairs in a year involving expenditure up to 5% of the annual rent shall be carried out by the tenant at his own cost and essential repairs involving expenditure in excess of 5% of the annual rent shall be carried out by the landlord on receiving notice from the tenant: Provided that where the landlord neglects to undertake essential repairs within a period of fifteen days from the date of receipt of notice, the tenant shall be at liberty to move the Rent Tribunal for permission to undertake the repairs, along with estimate of such repairs, and where permission is granted by the Rent Tribunal, it shall also pass orders with regard to the recovery of such cost from the landlord by setting off the amount against the rent payable by the tenant. (2) The provisions of sub-section (2), (3) and (4) section 23 shall apply mutatis mutandis to the proceeding before Rent Tribunal under this section.
Rajasthan Rent Control Act, 2001_Section 25--> State(s): Rajasthan The landlord shall have a right to inspect the premises let out by him at day time after giving prior intimation of at least seven days to the tenant. However, such inspection shall not be carried out by the landlord more than once in three months.
Rajasthan Rent Control Act, 2001_Section 26--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) The Presiding Officers and the employees of Rent Tribunal and Appellate Rent Tribunal shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (Central Act No. 45 of 1860). (2) The Presiding Officers of Rent Tribunal and Appellate Rent Tribunal shall function under the administrative and disciplinary control of the High Court. (3) The Presiding Officer of the Appellate Rent Tribunal shall exercise general power of superintendence and control over the Rent Tribunal under his jurisdiction including the power of appraising the work and recording the annual confidential reports of the Presiding Officers of the Rent Tribunals. (4) The Ministerial employees of Rent Tribunals and Appellate Rent Tribunal shall be governed by the Rajasthan Subordinate Courts Ministerial Establishment Rules, 1986 and for the purpose of these rules the Appellate Rent Tribunal shall be deemed to be the Courts of District and Sessions Judges and Rent Tribunal shall be deemed to be the Courts of Civil Judges (Senior Division). (5) The Class IV employees of Rent Tribunal and Appellate Rent Tribunal shall be governed by the Rajasthan Class IV Services (Recruitment and Other Service Conditions) Rules, 1999.
Rajasthan Rent Control Act, 2001_Section 27--> State(s): Rajasthan Subject to the provision of this Act, the provisions of limitation Act, 1963 (Central Act No. 36 of 1963) shall, as far as may be, apply to petitions, applications, appeals or other proceedings filed or proceeded with before a Rent Tribunal or an Appellate Rent Tribunal.
Rajasthan Rent Control Act, 2001_Section 28--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) Except as provided in sub-section (2), (3) and (4). the Court fee payable on petitions, applications and appeals filed before the Tribunal would be the same as would be payable it suits, applications or appeals were filed for the similar relief before civil courts. (2) On a joint petition for limited period tenancy under section 8 and on appeal against any order on such a petition ad valorem court fee under the Rajasthan Courts Fees and Suits Valuation Act, 1961 (Act No. 21 of 1961) shall be payable on the amount of rent payable for the year next before the date of presentation of the petition, irrespective of the period for which the limited period tenancy is sought to be entered. (3) On a petition regarding amenities under section 23 or a petition regarding repairs under section 24 and on an appeal against any order on such a petition, fixed court fee of Rs. 100/- shall be payable. (4) On petition for revision of rent under section 6 or under section 7 and on appeal against any order on such a petition, a fixed court fee of Rs. 250/- shall be payable.
Rajasthan Rent Control Act, 2001_Section 29--> State(s): Rajasthan The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent herewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.
Rajasthan Rent Control Act, 2001_Section 30--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the State Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty: Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of three years from the date of commencement of this Act, (2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid before the State Legislature while it is in session.
Rajasthan Rent Control Act, 2001_Section 31--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) The State Government may make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. (2) All rules made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after they are so made, before the House of the State Legislature, while it is in session for a period of not less than fourteen days which may be comprised in one session or in two successive sessions and if before the expiry of the session in which they are so laid or of the session immediately following, the House of the State Legislature makes any modification in any such of rules or resolves that any such rules should not be made, such rules shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be, so however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done there under.
Rajasthan Rent Control Act, 2001_Section 32--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) The Rajasthan Premises (Control of Rent and Eviction) Act, 1950 (Act No. 17 of 1950) shall stand repealed with effect from the date notified under sub-section (3) of section 1 of this Act. (2) The repeal under sub-section (1) shall not affect - (a) anything duly done or suffered under the enactment so repealed: or (b) any right, title, privilege, obligation or liability acquired or incurred under the enactment so repealed: or (c) any fine, penalty or punishment incurred or suffered under the provisions of the enactment so repealed. (3) Notwithstanding the repeal under sub-section (1),- (a) All applications, suits or other proceedings under the repealed Act pending on the date of commencement of this Act before any court shall be continued and disposed of, in accordance with the provisions of the repealed Act. as if the repealed Act had continued in force and this Act had not been enacted. However, the plaintiff within a period of one hundred and eight days of coming into force of this Act shall be entitled to withdraw any suit or appeal or any other proceeding pending under the repealed Act with liberty to file fresh petition in respect of the subject matter of such suit or appeal or any other proceeding under and in accordance with the provisions of this Act and for the purposes of limitation such petition shall, if it is filed within a period of two hundred and seventy days from the commencement of this Act, be deemed to have been filed on the date of filing of the suit which was so withdrawn and in case of withdrawal of appeal or other proceeding, on the date on which the suit, out of which such appeal or proceeding originated, was filed; (b) the provision for appeal under the repealed Act shall continue in force in respect of applications, suits and proceedings disposed of there under; (c) all prosecutions instituted under the provisions of the repealed Act shall be effective and disposed of in accordance with such repealed law: (d) any rule or notification made or issued under the repealed Act and in force on the date of commencement of this Act shall continue to govern the pending cases.
Rajasthan Rent Control Act, 2001_Section Sch.--> State(s): Rajasthan Schedule A (Section 22) Model Form Before the Rent Tribunal ... Original Petition No ... 1. Name, Fathers name, Age and Address of the Petitioner ...................... V/S 2. Name, Fathers name, Age and Address of the Respondent ...................... 3. Complete Address and description of the premises ...................... 4. Monthly/yearly rent of the premises ...................... 5. Valuation of petition (for eviction/arrears) ...................... 6. Court fees paid (for eviction/arrears) ...................... 7. Limitation ...................... 8. Provisions of Act invoked ...................... 9. Materials facts (i) ...................... (ii)...................... (iii) ...................... 10. Grounds of petition (a) ...................... (b) ...................... (c). ..................... 11. Affidavits relied upon (PW-1) ...................... (PW-2) ...................... (PW-3) ...................... 12. Documents relied upon (Ex-1) ...................... (Ex-2) ...................... (Ex-3) ...................... 13. Interim relief, if any, prayed for ...................... 14. Final relief prayed for ...................... 15. Verification ...................... Schedule B (Section 22) Model Form Before the Appellate Rent Tribunal ...................... Original Petition No ...................... 1. Name, Fathers name, Age and Address of the Appellant - ...................... V/S 2. Name, Fathers name, Age and Ad- ...................... dress of the Respondent ...................... 3. Complete Address and description of ...................... the premises ...................... 4. Monthly/yearly rent of the premises ...................... 5. Valuation of petition (for eviction/arrears) ...................... 6. Court fees paid (for eviction/arrears) ...................... 7. Limitation ...................... 8. Provisions of Act invoked ...................... 9. Materials facts (i) ...................... (ii) ...................... (iii) ...................... 10. Grounds of Appeal (a) ...................... (b) ...................... (c) ...................... 11. Interim relief, if any, prayed for ...................... 12. Final relief prayed for ...................... 13. Verification ...................... Schedule C (Section 22) THE RENT TRIBUNAL/APPELLATE RENT TRIBUNAL AT ......................... RECOVERY CERTIFICATE Original Petition/Appeal No ...................... 200 ...................... Petitioner/ Appellant. V/s ...................... Respondent. This petition/appeal came up on ...................... for final disposal in the presence of ...................... counsel for the Petitioner/Appellant and ... counsel for the Respondent. It is ordered that the Petitioner/Appellant is entitled to possession of the rented premises and/or arrears of rent etc. interest and costs/revision of rent, as under:- 1. Possession of rented premises situated at ....................... after ....................... day of ...................... 200 ... 2. Arrears of rent from ...................... to ...................... Rs . ...................... 3. Interest on arrears of rent from ....................... to ...................... @ ...................... % per annum. 4. Cost Rs ...................... 5. Rate of interest from date f recovery certificate till realisation @ ...................... % per annum. 6. Revision of Rent from Rs ...................... to Rs ...................... w.e.f. ...................... 7. Any other relief ...................... 8. Complete address and description of the premises ...................... Given under my hand and seal of Tribunal on ...................... day of ...................... 200 ....................... Seal Presiding Officer Rent Tribunal/Appellate Rent Tribunal 
