Rajasthan Relief of Agricultural Indebtedness Act, 1957_Section Preamble--> State(s): Rajasthan An Act to provide for the relief of agriculturists in the State of Rajasthan from indebtedness. WHEREAS it is expedient, in the interests of the general public, to make provision for the relief of agriculturists in the State of Rajasthan from indebtedness:
Rajasthan Relief of Agricultural Indebtedness Act, 1957_Section 1--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) This Act may be called the Rajasthan Relief of Agricultural Indebtedness Act, 1957.1 (2) It extends to the whole of the State of Rajasthan. (3) It shall come into force on such date as the State Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, appoint.2 Received the assent of the President on the 11th day of September , 1957 Came into force on 15-5-1958 vide Rev. Deptt. Notification No. F. 1(1681) Rev./D/57. Pub. in R.G.Gaz. pt.IV-C (Ext.). dated 2-5-1957
Rajasthan Relief of Agricultural Indebtedness Act, 1957_Section 2--> State(s): Rajasthan In this Act, unless the subject or context otherwise requires,- (a) "agriculture" includes,- (i) the raising of annual or periodical crops and garden produce, (ii) horticulture, (iii) the planting and upkeep of orchards, (iv) the reserving of land for fodder grazing or thatching grass; and (v) the breeding of cattle, camels, sheep or goats; (b) "agriculturist" means a person who earns his livelihood wholly or mainly from- (i) agriculture or (ii) rent from agricultural land, in case he belongs to any of the categories of persons mentioned in clauses (a) to (h) of sub- section (1) of section 46 of the Rajasthan Tenancy Act, 1955 (Rajasthan Act 3 of 1955),- and includes a person who ordinarily engages in agricultural labour or who works as an agricultural artisan; 1 [(bb) bank means a banking company as defined in section 5 of the banking Companies Act, 1949 (Central Act 10 of 1949) and includes the State Bank of India and any other banking institution notified under section 51 of the said Act;] (c) "debt" includes all liabilities owning to a creditor in cash or kind secured or unsecured, payable under a decree or order of a civil court or otherwise, whether due or not due, not shall not include land revenue or anything recoverable as land revenue other than liabilities payable under a decree of a village panchayat or any money for the recovery of which a suit is barred by limitation; 2 [(cc) "debtor" means an agriculturist or a member of Scheduled Caste or a schedule Tribe who is liable for debts aggregating to one hundred rupees or more, exclusive of claims in respect of liabilities mentioned in section 4;] (d) 3 ["debt relief court"] means a debt relief court established under section 3; (dd) "Scheduled Caste" means any of the castes, races or tribes, or parts of or groups within the castes, races to tribes, specified by the President under article 341 of the Constitution to be Scheduled Castes in relation to the State of Rajasthan; (ddd) "Scheduled Tribe" means any of the tribes or tribal communities, or parts of or groups within the tribes or tribal communities, specified by the President under article 342 of the Constitutions to be Scheduled Tribes in relation to the State of Rajasthan; 4 [(e) x x x ] (f) "State" means the State of Rajasthan as formed by section 10 of the State Reorganization Act, 1956 (Central Act 37 of 1956); (g) "Village Panchayat" means 5 [a Nyaya panchayat] established or deemed to be established under the Rajasthan Panchayat Act, 1953 (Rajasthan Act XXI of 1953). Inserted by Rajasthan Act No. 33 of 1960. Inserted vide section 2 of Rajasthan Act No. 9 of 1962. Debt Relief Courts have been established by Notification No. F. 1 (1681). Revenue D/57 dated 2-5-1958. Published in Rajasthan Gazette. Part IV-C. dated 2-5-1958 as subsequently amended by Notification No. F. 1(151) LJ/B/60. dated 5-10-60. published in Rajasthan Gazette. Part IV-C, dated 17-11-60. Omitted by Rajasthan Act No. 33 of 1960. Inserted vide section 2 of Rajasthan Act No. 9 of 1962.
Rajasthan Relief of Agricultural Indebtedness Act, 1957_Section 2A--> State(s): Rajasthan From such date as may be appointed in this behalf by the State Government by notification in the official Gazette, the provisions of this Act shall also apply to all the members of the Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes, or both, wherever residing in the State in the same manner as they apply to agriculturists and the word "agriculturist", wherever occurring in this Act, shall, unless the subject or context otherwise requires, be deemed to include a member of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribes irrespective of whether or not he is an agriculturists within the meaning of clause (b) of section 2. Inserted vide section 3 of Rajasthan Act No. 9 of 1962.
Rajasthan Relief of Agricultural Indebtedness Act, 1957_Section 3--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Rajasthan Civil Courts Ordinance, 1950 (Rajasthan Ordinance VII of 1950), the State Government may established Debt Relief Courts with such jurisdiction, as it may determine and may appoint persons possessing the prescribed qualification to the Judges of such courts.
Rajasthan Relief of Agricultural Indebtedness Act, 1957_Section 4--> State(s): Rajasthan The provisions of this Act shall not effect claims due in respect of:- (a) rent as defined in clause (22) of section 5 of the Rajasthan Tenancy Act, 1955 (Rajasthan Act 3 of 1955); (b) any liability in respect of any sum due to any society registered or deemed to be registered under the Rajas-than Co- operative Societies Act, 1953 (Rajasthan Act IV of 1953); (c) any liability arising out of a breach of trusts; (d) any liability in respect of maintenance whether under a decree of a court or otherwise; (e) any liability due to a 1 [x x x] bank; (f) arrears of wages or salary; (g) any liability in respect of village profits of land revenue arising between co-shares and the lambardars or between a proprietor and a thekedar or a farmer of proprietary rights or between co-shares in ijara and jagir villages; (h) a mortage-claim against property in the hands of a subsequent transferee who has taken the transfer in order to satisfy the mortgage; (i) any liability arising between mortgagor and mortgages in respect of land revenue of the mortgaged property which has been paid by the mortgagee on behalf of the mortgagor; (j) any revenue or tax payable to Government or any other sum of money due to Government by way of or towards repayment of loan or otherwise; (k) any payable to a local authority and any other sum of money due to it by way of or towards repayment of a loan or otherwise. Omitted by Rajasthan Act No. 33 of 1960.
Rajasthan Relief of Agricultural Indebtedness Act, 1957_Section 5--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) Whenever a suit or an insolvency petition against a debtor shall have been brought or made and pending in a competent court and such debtor or the person who brought or made such suit or petition applies to such court in this behalf, the court shall- (i) abate such suit or petition if it is satisfied on affidavit or otherwise than an application to the Debt Relief Court under section 6 or Section 6A has been made and admitted and is pending, or (ii) stay proceedings in such suit or application, if it is satisfied as aforesaid that the defendant or the opposite party, as the case may be, is a debtor within the meaning of this Act: Provided that, in the case of an application for stay under clause (ii), the court shall fix a period, not exceeding ninety days, within which the application to the Debt Relief Curt shall be made. (2) If any such suit or petition as is referred to in sub-section (1) shall have been pending- (i) against a member of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe, at the date of the applicability of this Act to such caste or tribes appointed under section 2A and (ii) in other cases at the date of the commencement of this Act, an application for stay of proceedings under subsection (1) may be made within six months of the date of such applicability or such commencement, as the case may be. Substituted vide section 4 of Rajasthan Act No. 9 of 1962.
Rajasthan Relief of Agricultural Indebtedness Act, 1957_Section 6--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) Any debtor who is liable for debts individually or jointly with another person, may file an application before the Debt Relief Court having jurisdiction in the area in which he ordinarily resides or earns his livelihood praying for the determination of his debts. (2) Such an application praying for the determination of the debts, outstanding against a debtor, may also be filed by his creditor or his surety, whether such debtor is liable for such debts individually or jointly with another person. (3) Every application under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) shall be signed and verified in accordance with order VI, rule 15, of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Central Act V of 1908) and shall contain the following particulars, namely:- (a) a statement that the debtor is an agriculturist or a member of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe, (b) the place where he normally resides, (c) a statement of all his debts outstanding against him, including those referred to in section 4, as nearly as may be ascertainable and the names and addresses of his creditors, (d) a statement of all his property, including claims due to him, together with a specification of the value of his property and the place or places at which any such property is to be found, and (e) such other particulars, as may be prescribed. (4) In cases covered by clause (ii) of sub-section (1) of section 5, an application under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of this section, as the case may be, shall be filed within the period fixed under the proviso to sub-section (1) of section 5. (5) All applications pending before Debt Relief Courts at the commencement of the Rajasthan Relief of Agricultural Indebtedness (Amendment) ordinance, 1961 (ordinance No. 7 of 1961), shall continue and be deemed to have been presented under this section. (6) The suit or insolvency petition in which proceeding may have been stayed under clause (ii) of Sub-section (1) of Section 5 shall abate- (i) if no such application as is referred to in Sub-section (4) is filed, or (ii) if such an application is admitted and notice of such admission has been received by the court concerned. (7) If such an application is rejected, the debtor shall not be entitled to file another application in any Debt Relief Court and any proceedings stayed under Sub-section (1) of section 5 shall be resumed.] Substituted section 5 of Rajasthan Act No. 9 of 1962
Rajasthan Relief of Agricultural Indebtedness Act, 1957_Section 6A--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) If any debtor and all or any of his creditors arrive at a settlement in respect of debts due by the debtor to such creditor or creditors, the debtor orals or any of such creditors may, within thirty days from the date of such settlement, make an application to the Debt Relief Court having jurisdiction in the area in which the debtors ordinarily resides or earns his livelihood, praying for recording such settlement. (2) Every such application shall be in the prescribed form and shall be signed and verified in the manner laid down in subsection (3) of section 6. (3) On receipt of such application, the Debt Relief Court shall, after giving notice in the prescribed manner to the creditor or the debtor, as the case may be, and after making such inquiry as it thinks fit, record such settlement and certify the same if it is satisfied that such settlement is bona fide and is not made with intent to defeat or delay any of the creditors of the debtors and is in the interest of the debtor. Every settlement so recorded and certified shall be binding and shall not be reopened. (4) After the Debt Relief Court has recorded and certified a settlement under Sub-section (3). it shall call upon the debtor to declare if there are any other debts due to the debtor which are not included in the settlement. If the debtor makes a declaration that there are no such debts, the court shall make an order in terms of the settlement. (5) If the court is satisfied, after recording and certifying such settlement, that there are also other debts due from the debtors which are not included in the settlement the court shall treat the application under Sub-section (1) as having been admitted as an application under 6. Inserted vide sections 6 and 7 of Rajasthan Act No. 9 of 1962.
Rajasthan Relief of Agricultural Indebtedness Act, 1957_Section 7--> State(s): Rajasthan Upon the admission of an application under section 6 1 [or section 6A] all creditors of the applicant, including those to whom any liability referred to in section 4 is due, shall be joined as parties to the proceedings and the Debt Relief Court shall pass an order fixing a date of hearing, shall cause notice of such date, together with a copy of the application, to be served on all such creditors of the applicant and shall cause copies of such notice and application to be affixed to the Court house. Inserted vide section 6 and 7 of Rajasthan Act No. 9 of 1962
Rajasthan Relief of Agricultural Indebtedness Act, 1957_Section 8--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) on or before the date fixed for the hearing of the creditors under section 7, which shall not be earlier than two months from the date of service of notice or of the issue of proclamation under Order V, rule 20, of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure 1908 (Central Act of 1908), every creditor shall submit a statement of his claim signed and verified in the manner prescribed by Order VI, rule 15 of the First Schedule to the said Code, Such statement shall be submitted in person, by agent, by pleader or by registered post and every claim not so submitted deemed for all purposes and all occasions to have been discharged as against such debtor or debtors: Provided that, if the Debt Relief Court is satisfied that for good and sufficient cause any creditor was unable to submit his claims, it may extend the time upon such conditions, as to costs as it may think fit and may revive the claim. (2) On the date of which the case is fixed for hearing, every creditor shall produce the documents in his possession or control on which he bases his claim. He shall also furnish a full and true statement of accounts of all previous transactions between his and his debtor leading to the claim and his account books or copies thereof, if any, in his possession or control. If such documents and statements are not produced at such hearing or at any adjourned hearing fixed for the purpose by the Debt Relief Court, the Court may declare such claim to be discharged for all purposes and all occasions against such debtor or debtors: Provided that, if the Debt Relief Court is satisfied that any creditor was, for good and sufficient cause, unable to produce such documents or statements, it may, on such conditions as to costs as it may think fit, extend the date for the purpose and may revive the claim.
Rajasthan Relief of Agricultural Indebtedness Act, 1957_Section 9--> State(s): Rajasthan On the day fixed for the hearing of the case or on any subsequent day to which the hearing may be adjourned, the Debt Relief Court shall require proof of the validity and subsisting character of the debts.
Rajasthan Relief of Agricultural Indebtedness Act, 1957_Section 10--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any enactment for the time being in force or in any agreement between the parties or the person through whom they claim, as to allowing compound interest or treating without an account the profits of mortgaged property to be interest on the mortgage money or specifying the mode of otherwise settling accounts, and notwithstanding any writing, statement or settlement of accounts or any agreement purporting to close previous dealings and create a new obligation, the Debt Relief Court shall- (i) re-open all transactions carried on during 1 [fifteen years] immediately preceding the last transaction or the first day of January, 1952, whichever is earlier. (ii) ascertain the amount and date of each loan originally advanced and (iii) draw up an account, which, in case there are more creditors than one, shall be prepared separately for each of them in the manner laid down hereunder, namely:- (a) separate accounts of interest and principal shall be taken up to the date of the application filed under section 6 2 [or under Sub-section (1) of section 6A, as the case may be.] (b) in the account of principal moneys advanced, there shall be debited to the debtor such moneys, as may from time to time have been actually received by him or on his account from each creditors and the price of goods, if any, sold to the debtor by such creditor, as part of the transaction: Provided that there shall not be so debited to the debtor- (i) any sum in excess of the amount due or to accrue due under a decree which the debtor may have agreed directly or indirectly to pay in pursuance of any agreement relating to the satisfaction of such decree, or (ii) any accumulated interest which has been converted into principal in any statement or settlement of accounts or by any contract made in the course of the transactions. (c) in the account of interest, there shall be debited to the debtor simple interest on the balance of the principal moneys for the time being outstanding at the rate stipulated by the parties or, if the debt is payable under the decree or order of the civil court, at the rate provided for in such decree or order or at the rate of six per cent per annum in the case of secured loans and nine percent per annum in the case of unsecured loans, whichever is the lowest; (d) all moneys paid by or on account of the debtor to the creditor or on his account and of profits, services or other advantages of every description received by the creditor in the course of the transaction, estimated, if necessary, at such money value as the Debt Relief Court in its discretion or with the aid of valuers appointed by it may determine, shall be credited first in the account of interest and, if any such payment or the money equivalent of any such profits, services or other advantages, exceeds the balance of interest due at the time it is made, the residue thereof shall be credited to the debtor in the account of principal moneys; (e) if the aggregate of the amounts so credited in the account of interest is equal to the total amount of the principal, no further interest thereon shall be deemed to be due; (f) the Debt Relief Court shall, in the manner laid down in this Sub-section and subject to the provisions of the succeeding Sub- sections, determine and declare separately the amounts outstanding against the debtor as principal and interest. (2) A Debt Relief Court shall reduce by forty per cent, the principal amount of the loans advanced prior to the 1st of January, 3 [1945] as found in accordance with the provisions of Sub-section (1) to be due on the date of the application filed under section 6 4 [or under Sub-section (1) of section 6A, as the case may be.] (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or in any other law for the time being in force, no Debt Relief Court shall award on account of arrears of interest a sum exceeding the total amount of principal found due in accordance with the foregoing provisions of this section. (4) If a Debt Relief Court finds that nothing is due to the creditor, it shall pass an order discharging the debt. (5) If the aggregate of the amounts credited in the account of interest in the manner laid down in Sub-section (1) is less than the total amount of the principal, the difference between the total amount so credited and the total amount of the principal or the balance outstanding in the account of interest, whichever is less, shall be allowed as interest. (6) Nothing contained in this Act shall be deemed to require the creditor to refund any sum which has been paid to him or to increase the liability of the debtor to pay any amount in excess of that which would have been payable by him, if this Act had not been passed. (7) In the case of any transaction carried on between a debtor and a creditor in kind in the form of grain or goods for the purpose of manure or seed or any other purpose, the account of such transactions shall be prepared in terms of the money equivalent of such grain or goods calculated at the market price thereof prevailing at the time of the transaction. Substituted and inserted vide section 8 of Rajasthan Act No. 9 of 1962. Substituted and inserted vide section 8 of Rajasthan Act No. 9 of 1962. Substituted and inserted vide section 8 of Rajasthan Act No. 9 of 1962. Substituted and inserted vide section 8 of Rajasthan Act No. 9 of 1962.
Rajasthan Relief of Agricultural Indebtedness Act, 1957_Section 11--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) When the amount due has been determined under section 10, the Debt Relief Court shall, after taking into account the liability of the debtor in respect of claims referred to in section 4, prepare a scheme of payment of debtors debts. (2) If the debtor has transferable property, which he is willing to transfer to enable him to repay the whole or any part of his Debts, the Debt Relief Court may sanction such transfer on such conditions as it may think necessary to impose in order to safeguard the rights of the creditors including those to whom any liability referred to in section 4 is due and may grant such reasonable time as is necessary for the debtor to transfer such property: Provided that, when there is any mortgage, lien or charge upon the property, such sanction shall be given only upon terms which will ensure that such mortgage, lien or charge shall subsist to such extent as he sufficient to safeguard the interests of the secured creditor: Provided further that when a transfer has been agreed to before the Debt Relief Court by the Parties to the proceedings and either party fails to complete the transaction within a period of sixty days, the Court may take action, as far as may be, under Order XXI, rule 32 of the First Schedule to the Cost of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Central Act V of 1908). (3) If, after the transfer of property, if any, under Sub-section (2), the debts as determined under section 10 have not been satisfied, the Debt Relief Court shall fix installments for the repayment of the remaining debts in such manner, as may be prescribed and may, in case of default, order payment of simple interest at a rate not exceeding four per cent, if the debt is unsecured and three percent if it is secured: Provided that, if in the opinion of the Court, such debtor has unreasonably refused to transfer property in satisfaction of the whole or part of his debts, it may award a rate of interest not exceeding six per cent per annum in the case of secured loans and nine per cent per annum in the case of unsecured loans: Provided further that, in fixing installments, the Debt Relief Court shall have regard to the extent of the transferable property in the possession of the debtor and his paying capacity to be determined by rules made by the State Government in this behalf. (4) When installments have been fixed under the preceding Sub- section, the Debt Relief Court shall drawn up a final decree under its seal and signature of the Judge or Judges thereof and such decree shall be deemed to be a decree of the lowest civil court having jurisdiction over the local area in which the debtor ordinarily resides or earns his livelihood and shall be executable as such but no appeal shall lie therefrom nor shall lawyers fee be taxed thereon.
Rajasthan Relief of Agricultural Indebtedness Act, 1957_Section 11A--> State(s): Rajasthan Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 10 and 11, if during the pendency of the proceedings before a Debt Relief Court a settlement is arrived at between the debtor and all his creditors and if the Debt Relief Court is satisfied that the settlement has been made by the debtor voluntarily, and is for his benefit, such court may make order in terms of such settlement.] Inserted vide section 9 of Rajasthan Act No. 9 of 1962.
Rajasthan Relief of Agricultural Indebtedness Act, 1957_Section 12--> State(s): Rajasthan When the land revenue or rent, as the case may be, due by the debtor is suspended or remitted in whole or part, the installment shall be suspended and shall become payable one year after the last of the remaining installments. No interest shall be charged on such suspended installments.
Rajasthan Relief of Agricultural Indebtedness Act, 1957_Section 13--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) No transfer of immovable property shall be valid if made by a debtor in respect of whose debts, proceedings are pending 1 [under section 6 or section 6A,] unless made with the sanction of the Debt Relief Court. (2) Every transfer of immovable property made by a debtor, in respect of whose debts a scheme has been prepared under Subsection (1) of section 11, shall be void unless made with the sanction of the Collector within whose jurisdiction, the debtor ordinarily resides or earns his livelihood. The Collector shall not sanction any transfer of such property unless he is satisfied that such transfer will not defeat the claims of any creditors, the payment of whose claims has been ordered by such scheme. Substituted vide section 10 of Rajasthan Act No. 9 of 1962.
Rajasthan Relief of Agricultural Indebtedness Act, 1957_Section 14--> State(s): Rajasthan If during the period for which the scheme prepared under section 11 is in force, the debtor or the creditor dies, the provisions of section 49 and 50 and Order XXII of the First Schedule of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Central Act V of 1908) shall, as far as may be, apply.
Rajasthan Relief of Agricultural Indebtedness Act, 1957_Section 15--> State(s): Rajasthan Nothing contained in this Act shall apply to the debts payable by any person who has been adjudicated an insolvent prior to the commencement of this Act 1 [or, in the case of a member of a Scheduled tribe, prior to the applicability thereof under Section 2A], provided that the adjudication has been not annulled before or after such commencement 2 [or applicability]. Inserted vide Section 11 of Rajasthan Act No. 9 of 1962. Inserted vide Section 11 of Rajasthan Act No. 9 of 1962.
Rajasthan Relief of Agricultural Indebtedness Act, 1957_Section 16--> State(s): Rajasthan The Debt Relief Court, in regard to proceedings under this Act, shall so far as is practicable, have the same powers and shall follow the same procedure as it would have and follow, if it were a Court of Original Civil Jurisdiction.
Rajasthan Relief of Agricultural Indebtedness Act, 1957_Section 17--> State(s): Rajasthan Any person aggrieved by an order of a Debt Relief Court may, within ninety days of such order, apply to the District Court for revision of the order on any of the following grounds:- (a) that the order is contrary to law; (b) that the court has exercised a jurisdiction not vested in it by law or has failed to exercise a jurisdiction vested in it by law; (c) that the installments fixed under Sub-section (3) of section 11 are inequitable; but, subject to the orders of the District Court on such application and further subject to the provisions of section 18, the order of the Debt Relief Court shall be final. Explanation - For the purposes of this section 1 [and section 18,18A and 19], the District Curt shall be deemed to be the Court of District Judge within whose civil jurisdiction, the Debt Relief Court is situate. Inserted vide Section 12 & 13 of Rajasthan Act No. 9 of 1962.
Rajasthan Relief of Agricultural Indebtedness Act, 1957_Section 18--> State(s): Rajasthan A Debt Relief Court, or the District Court which has passed any order under section 17, may either on its own motion at any time or on an application from any person interested made within sixty days of the passing of any order, review the order so passed and pass by other order in reference thereto, as it thinks fit: Provided that no order once passed shall be varied or reversed unless notice has been given to the persons interested to appear and be heard in support thereof.
Rajasthan Relief of Agricultural Indebtedness Act, 1957_Section 18A--> State(s): Rajasthan On the application of any aggrieved person or on its own motion, the District Court may, at any stage of the proceedings, transfer any application of the determination of debts pending before a Debt Relief Court to another Debt Relief Court.] Inserted vide Section 12 & 13 of Rajasthan Act No. 9 of 1962.
Rajasthan Relief of Agricultural Indebtedness Act, 1957_Section 19--> State(s): Rajasthan The District Court, in regard to proceeding under this Act, shall, so far as is practicable and subject to the provisions of this Act have the same powers and shall follow the same procedure as it would have and follow under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Central Act V of 1908).
Rajasthan Relief of Agricultural Indebtedness Act, 1957_Section 20--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) The creditor shall be liable to pay one-fifth of such court-fee upon the amount determined as due under section 10, as he would be liable to pay upon a plaint filed for the recovery of that sum, and no further proceedings shall be taken under this Act until the sum due has been paid: Provided that no court-fees shall be payable if court-fees have already been paid in respect of a debt. (2) If such court-fees are not paid within such time as the Debt Relief Court considers to be reasonable in each case, it may declare his claim to be discharged for all purposes and all occasions. (3) When such court-fees have been paid, the Debt Relief Court shall tax the amount thereof as costs in the decree prepared under Sub-section (4) of section 11 and the amount so taxed shall be payable by the debtor in such annual installments, in addition to the installments fixed under Sub-section (3) of section 11, as the Debt Relief Court may direct.
Rajasthan Relief of Agricultural Indebtedness Act, 1957_Section 21--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) Subject to the provisions of sections 17 to 19, the jurisdiction of the civil courts and the insolvency courts shall be barred in respect of- (a) any matter pending before a Debt Relief Court; (b) the claim for any debt which has been discharged or deemed to have been discharged under section 8; (c) the recovery of any debt, the recovery of which is included in any scheme under Sub-section (1) of section 11 for the time being in force and any order of a Debt Relief Court under Sub- section (2) and (3) of that section or under section 20, and (d) any order of a Collector under section 13. (2) Nothing herein contained shall prevent a court which has stayed proceedings under the provisions of this Act from resuming them and passing such orders in regard to them as are not inconsistent with this Act.
Rajasthan Relief of Agricultural Indebtedness Act, 1957_Section 22--> State(s): Rajasthan In calculating the period of limitation for any suit filed in, or proceedings before, a civil court for the recovery of a debt which was the subject to any proceedings under this Act, the time during which such proceedings had continued, shall be excluded.
Rajasthan Relief of Agricultural Indebtedness Act, 1957_Section 23--> State(s): Rajasthan The State Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, make rules- (a) regarding any matter which is required to be or may be prescribed under this Act; (b) prescribing the manner in which notices shall be issued, served and published under this Act; (c) prescribing the record to be kept and the returned to be made by a Debt Relief Court; (d) prescribing the jurisdiction of Debt Relief Court; (e) determining the paying capacity of a debtor; (f) generally for carrying into effect the purposes of this Act.
Rajasthan Relief of Agricultural Indebtedness Act, 1957_Section 24--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) The enactments specified in the Scheduled to this Act and all laws amending the same shall stand repealed on the date this Act comes into force. (2) Such repeal shall not affect any proceedings pending on the date of the commencement of this Act under any law so repealed before any court, board, tribunal or authority and all such proceedings shall continue and be heard and determined by the Debt Relief Court in accordance with such law as if this Act had not been passed.
Rajasthan Relief of Agricultural Indebtedness Act, 1957_Section 25--> State(s): Rajasthan The Rajasthan General Clauses Act, 1955, (Rajasthan Act 8 of 1955) in force in the pre-reorganization State of Rajasthan shall, as far as may be, apply mutatis mutandis to this Act.
Rajasthan Relief of Agricultural Indebtedness Act, 1957_Section Sch.--> State(s): Rajasthan (See section 24) 1. The Marwar Relief of Indebtedness Act, 1941. 2. The Marwar Agriculturists Relief Act. 1942. 3. The Bundi Agriculturists Relief Act. 4. The Agricultural Relief Rules of the former Sirohi State. 5. The Bombay Agricultural Debtors Relief Act, 1947, in so far as it applies to the Abu area and in so far as it extends to the Ajmer area. 6. The Madhya Bharat Agricultural Debtors Relief Act, 1956, in so far as it applies to the Sunel area. 7. All laws dealing with or providing for the relief of agriculturists from indebtedness in force in any part of the State. 
