Rajasthan Religious Buildings and Places Act, 1954_Section Preamble--> State(s): Rajasthan An Act to regulate the construction of public religious buildings and to restrict the use of public places for religious purposes. Whereas with a view to avoiding a breach of the public peace and tranquillity likely to arise from disputes between different sections of the people of 1 [the State of Rajasthan], it is expedient to regulate the construction of public religious buildings and restrict the use of public places for religious purposes: It is hereby enacted as follows:- Substituted by RajasthAn Act No. 27 of 1957 [13.8.1957]
Rajasthan Religious Buildings and Places Act, 1954_Section 1--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) This Act may be called the Rajasthan Religious Buildings and Places Act, 1954.1 2 [(2) It extends to the whole of the State of Rajasthan.] (3) It shall come into force on the date of its first publication in the 3 [Official Gazette]. Received the assent of the President on the 15th day of August, 1954. Substituted by Rajasthan Act No. 27 of 1957 [13.8.1957] Substituted by Rajasthan Act No. 27 of 1957 [13.8.1957]
Rajasthan Religious Buildings and Places Act, 1954_Section 2--> State(s): Rajasthan [xxx] Omitted by Rajasthan Act No. 27 of 1957 113.8.19571
Rajasthan Religious Buildings and Places Act, 1954_Section 3--> State(s): Rajasthan [xxx] Omitted by Rajasthan Act No. 27 of 1957 113.8.19571
Rajasthan Religious Buildings and Places Act, 1954_Section 4--> State(s): Rajasthan In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- (i) 1 [xxx] (ii) "building" means a house, shop, hut, shed or other structure or enclosure, whether roofed or not, of whatsoever material constructed and includes every part thereof, all walls, verandas, platforms, plinths, doors steps and the like and a tent or other portable and merely temporary shelter: 2 [(iii) "Commissioner" means the Divisional Commissioner appointed under section 17 of the Rajasthan Land Revenue Act, 1956 (Rajasthan Act 15 of 1956):] (iv) "place" means any open space which is not a building: (v) "public" used with reference to a building or place, signifies that such building or place, whether or not acquired, constructed and maintained by or at the expense of some specified person or body of persons is not the private and personal property of such person or body and is open to the use and enjoyment of the public in general or of a particular class or section thereof for the purpose, if any, for which it may have been set apart: (vi) "religious" when used with reference to a building or place, signifies- (a) that such building is used or intended to be used for the purpose of religious worship or instruction, or offering prayers (which include Bhajan, Kirtan, Stuti or Namaj) or performance of any religious rites by persons of a belonging to any religion, creed, sect or class, such as a temple, mosque, church, chhatri, dargha, khangah, mutt, takiya or the like, or (b) that such place is likewise used or intended to be used. Omitted by Rajasthan Act 7 of 1988. Inserted by Rajasthan Act 7 of 1988.
Rajasthan Religious Buildings and Places Act, 1954_Section 5--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) No person shall use any public place- (a) as a permanent religious place, or (b) save with the previous written permission of the Collector obtained in the prescribed manner, as a temporary religious place. (2) Nothing in this section shall apply to cremation grounds and burial places or to the holding of functions or the taking out of processions. in connection with deaths or marriages or to other purely social and secular functions or to religious processions.
Rajasthan Religious Buildings and Places Act, 1954_Section 6--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) No person shall without first obtaining the written permission of the Collector- (a) construct any public religious building, 1 [x x x] (b) convert any private or public building or place into a public religious building, 2 [or] 3 [(c) destroy, damage or transfer any public religious building or place.) Explanation-The temporary use of a building or place for religious purposes on occasions such as Holi. Moharram and the like shall not be deemed to be the conversion thereof into a public religious building. (2) A person desirous of obtaining permission for any of the purposes mentioned in sub-section (1) shall first obtain permission from any local authority or officer having jurisdiction over the area where the building or place in question lies and thereafter such person shall apply to the Collector for the requisite permission in the prescribed manner. Inserted by Rajasthan Act7 of 1988. Inserted by Rajasthan Act 7 of 1988 Added by Rajasthan Act 7 of 1988.
Rajasthan Religious Buildings and Places Act, 1954_Section 7--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) When an application under section 5 or section 6 is presented to the Collector in the prescribed manner, he may, after making such inquiry as he may think necessary, either disallow the application or grant the requisite permission unconditionally or with such conditions as to security or otherwise as he may consider reasonable in the circumstances of each case. (2) The order of the Collector passed under sub-section (1) shall be communicated in writing to the applicant and if the latter does not receive such communication within four weeks in the case of an application under section 5 or within three months in case of an application under section 6, calculated from the date on which such application was received in the office of the Collector, the applicant shall be deemed to have obtained the permission required by section 5 or section 6 as the case may be.
Rajasthan Religious Buildings and Places Act, 1954_Section 8--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) An appeal shall lie, and may be brought in the prescribed mode to the 1 [revenue appellate authority] from an order of the Collector made under section 7 within thirty days from the date on which it was communicated to the applicant. 2 [(2) Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Revenue Appellate Authority under sub-section (1) may, within ninety days from the date of such decision, appeal to the Commissioner of the area from where the matter has arisen and the decision of the Commissioner shall be final.] Substituted by Rajasthan Act No. 8 of 1962 [23.4.62] Substituted by Rajasthan Act 7 of 1988.
Rajasthan Religious Buildings and Places Act, 1954_Section 9--> State(s): Rajasthan An order made under this Act by a Collector or an appeal by a 1 [revenue appellate authority] or 2 [a Commissioner] shall be final and shall not be liable to be called in question in any civil court. Substituted by Rajasthan Act No. 8 of 1962 [23.4.62] Substituted by Rajasthan Act7 of 1988.
Rajasthan Religious Buildings and Places Act, 1954_Section 10--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) A permission obtained under section 5 shall expire three months after the date of the order granting the same or the day next after the date on which the act thereby permitted was to be performed, whichever may be earlier. (2) A permission obtained under section 6 shall endure for a period of one year within which the act permitted to be done should be commenced.
Rajasthan Religious Buildings and Places Act, 1954_Section 11--> State(s): Rajasthan Whoever contravenes, or attempts to contravene, or abets the contravention of, any of the provisions of this Act or the rules made there under may have been granted shall on conviction be punishable with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three months or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees or with both.
Rajasthan Religious Buildings and Places Act, 1954_Section 11A--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in but with prejudice to the provisions of section 12, the Sub-Divisional Officer, on his own motion or on a complaint or otherwise on receiving information that any work has been construed in contravention of the provisions of this Act or of any permission granted there under within his jurisdiction, shall proceed to inquire into the truth of the matter and if after inquiry comes to the conclusion that the work has been so constructed, he shall make a report to the effect to the Collector. (2) Whether the Collector, on the receipt of the report under sub-section (1) of suo motu has reasons to believe that a work has been constructed in contravention of this Act or of any permission granted there under, he shall cause to be notified in the locality by beat of drum and by affixing a show cause notice on the conspicuous part of the work so constructed and on the notice board of his office and also cause notice to be served on the person or persons (if ascertainable) responsible for the construction of the work calling for objections, if any, within a period of fifteen days as to why such work should not be removed and may, if necessary, stay further construction till he gives his findings on the matter. (3) The Collector shall than hear and decide the objections, if any, and record the finding on the matter. (4) If the Collector arrives at the finding that the work was constructed in contravention of the provisions of this Act or of any permission granted there under, he shall direct the removal of the work so as to restore the building or place in question, as nearly as may be, to its original condition. (5) Subject to the result of any appeal that may be filed, where any work is not removed in compliance with the direction within a period of one month from the date of such direction of the Collector, or of the decision of appeal, if any, the Collector shall cause such compliance to be made through a police officer not below the rank of Sub-Inspector the cost of the defaulter in the prescribed manner. (6) The provisions of section 8 shall mutatis mutandis apply to an order made by the Collector under sub-section (4) in the same manner as they apply to an order made under section 7. Inserted by Rajasthan Act 7 of 1988
Rajasthan Religious Buildings and Places Act, 1954_Section 12--> State(s): Rajasthan 1 [(1) The court making an order of conviction for any offense under section 11 shall direct that any work which shall have been constructed in contravention of the provisions of this Act or of any Permission granted there under, but has not been already removed under the provisions of section 11-A, shall be removed so as to restore the building or the place in question as nearly as may be to its original conditions.] (2) In case of non-compliance with a direction made under subsection (1) the Court shall cause such compliance to be made through a Police Officer not below the rank of Sub-Inspector at the cost of the defaulter in the prescribed manner. Substituted by Rajasthan Act 7 of 1988
Rajasthan Religious Buildings and Places Act, 1954_Section 13--> State(s): Rajasthan An offense under this Act shall be tribal by a Sub-Divisional Magistrate or a Magistrate of First Class on the complaint of a Police Officer not below the rank of a Sub-Inspector made under the order of a Collector.
Rajasthan Religious Buildings and Places Act, 1954_Section 14--> State(s): Rajasthan The 1 [State Government] may, be notification in the 2 [Official Gazette], make such rules, consistent with this Act, as may appear to it reasonable regulating all matters that are required by this Act to be prescribed and generally for the purpose of carrying into effect the provisions of this Act. Inserted by Rajasthan Act 7 of 1988. Substituted by Rajasthan Act 27 of 1957. 
