Rajasthan Rent-Rates Determination and Validation Act, 1954_Section Preamble--> State(s): Rajasthan An Act to provide the basis for the determination of rent-rates and to validate the rent-rates determined previously in accordance with sub basis. Be it enacted by the Rajasthan State Legislature as follows:-
Rajasthan Rent-Rates Determination and Validation Act, 1954_Section 1--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) This Act may be called the Rajasthan Rent-Rates Determination and Validation Act, 19541 . (2) It extends to the whole of Rajasthan. (3) It shall come into force at once. Received the assent of His Highness the Rajpramukh on the 16th day of April, 1954.
Rajasthan Rent-Rates Determination and Validation Act, 1954_Section 2--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) In this Act, unless the context or subject otherwise requires,- (a) Rent-Rates means the rent-rates determined in any part of the State after the 4th day of June, 1951 on the basis laid down in section 3; (b) State means the State of Rajasthan. (2) The provisions of the General Clauses Act, 1897, of the Central Legislature shall mutantis mutandis apply, so far as may be, to this Act in the manner as they apply to a Central Act.
Rajasthan Rent-Rates Determination and Validation Act, 1954_Section 3--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) Notwithstanding any custom, usage or practice to the contrary and notwithstanding anything contained in any law, enactment, rule, order or instrument, the rent-rates determined during the course of settlement operations in any part of the State shall, as early as may be, represent,- (a) In the case of such rent-rates having been determined between the 4th day of June, 1951 and the 29th day of April, 1952, not more than one-fourth of the yearly gross produce, and (b) In the case of rent-rates determined after the 29th day of April, 1952, not more than one-sixth of the yearly gross produce. (2) The expressionGross Produce in this section shall not include the straw-chaff (Bhusa) or the dry stalks of a crop or grass or any other natural produce.
Rajasthan Rent-Rates Determination and Validation Act, 1954_Section 4--> State(s): Rajasthan For the removal of doubts it is hereby declared that, notwithstanding any custom, usage or practice to the contrary and notwithstanding anything contained in any law, enactment, rule, order or instrument,- (a) rent-rates determined in any part of the State after the 4th day of June, 1951 and before the commencement of this Act on the basis laid down in section 3 shall be deemed to have been, lawfully determined and shall have the same validity and effect, as if they were duly determined under that section, and (b) Every such law, enactment, rule, order, instrument, custom, usage or practice of a Covenanting State shall be deemed to have been modified on and from the 4th day of June, 1951, to the extent and in the manner specified in section 3.
Rajasthan Rent-Rates Determination and Validation Act, 1954_Section 5--> State(s): Rajasthan The Rajasthan Lagan-Dar Nishchayan Tatha Vaidh-karan Adhyadesh, 1954 (the Rajasthan Rent-Rates Determination and Validation Ordinance, 1954) is hereby repealed but not so as to affect in any way its previous operation. 
