Rajasthan Revenue Laws (Extension) Act, 1957_Section Preamble--> State(s): Rajasthan An Act to provide for the extension of certain revenue laws of the pre-reorganisation State of Rajasthan to the Abu, Ajmer and Sunel areas. Whereas, with a view to securing uniformity of revenue laws in the new State of Rajasthan as formed by section 10 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956 (Central Act 37 of 1956), it is expedient to provide for the extension to the Abu, Ajmer and Sunel areas of that State of the Rajasthan Tenancy Act, 1955 (RajasthAn Act No. 3 of 1955) and the Rajasthan Land Revenue Act, 1956 (RajasthAn Act 15 of 1956) as in force in the pre- reorganisation State of Rajasthan and to make suitable modifications therein for that purpose and for other purposes hereinafter appearing; BE it enacted by the Rajasthan State Legislature in the Eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Rajasthan Revenue Laws (Extension) Act, 1957_Section 1--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) This Act may be called the Rajasthan Revenue Laws (Extension) Act, 1957.1 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.2 Received the assent of the President on the 7th day of January, 1958 Published in the Rajasthan Rajpatra, Extraordinary, part IV-A, dated 13-01-1958
Rajasthan Revenue Laws (Extension) Act, 1957_Section 2--> State(s): Rajasthan In this Act, unless the subject or context otherwise requires,- (i) "appointed day" means the date appointed by notification issued under sub-section (2) of section 1 for the commencement of this and; and (ii) "Rajasthan Revenue Laws" means the Rajasthan Tenancy Act, 1955 (Rajasthan Act 3 of 1955) and the Rajasthan Land Revenue Act, 1956 (Rajasthan Act 15 of 1956) as in force in the pre- reorganisation State of Rajasthan.
Rajasthan Revenue Laws (Extension) Act, 1957_Section 3--> State(s): Rajasthan On and from the appointed day, the Rajasthan revenue laws shall be amended in the manner and to the extent specified in section 4 and the First Schedule.
Rajasthan Revenue Laws (Extension) Act, 1957_Section 4--> State(s): Rajasthan Throughout the Rajasthan revenue laws, unless the subject or context otherwise requires and save as is otherwise provided in this Act,- (i) for the expression "Rajasthan Gazette", wherever occurring the expression "Official Gazette" shall be substituted, (ii) for the word "Rajasthan", wherever occurring otherwise than in the expression 'Rajasthan Gazette' or in the expression "State of Rajasthan" or in the short titles of the Rajasthan revenue laws or in any other Rajasthan enactment, the words "the State" shall be substituted: and (iii) references to the commencement or coming into force of any of the Rajasthan revenue laws shall, in relation to the commencement of such law in the Abu, Ajmer and Sunel areas, be construed as references to the commencement of this Act.
Rajasthan Revenue Laws (Extension) Act, 1957_Section 5--> State(s): Rajasthan On and from the appointed day, the Rajasthan revenue laws, as amended by sections 3 and 4 and the rules, regulations, orders and notifications made or issued under such laws by a competent authority, shall extend and apply to the whole of the new State of Rajasthan including the Abu, Ajmer and Sunel areas.
Rajasthan Revenue Laws (Extension) Act, 1957_Section 6--> State(s): Rajasthan Any reference, by whatever form of words, in any law in force in the Abu, Ajmer or Sunel area, or in any instrument or document, to any authority or to any revenue, village or other officer or to any village servant competent to exercise any powers or to discharge any duties or to perform any functions or to render any service in such area shall, where the corresponding authority has been constituted, or a corresponding new revenue, village or other officer or village servant has been appointed or provided for by or under the Rajasthan revenue laws or the rules, regulations, orders and notifications there under, have effect as if it were a reference to such new authority, officer or servant, as the case may be.
Rajasthan Revenue Laws (Extension) Act, 1957_Section 7--> State(s): Rajasthan For the purpose of facilitating the application of any of the provisions of the Rajasthan revenue laws and the rules, regulations, orders and notifications thereunder, any court, authority or officer may construe the same with such alterations not affecting the substance, as may be necessary or proper to adopt such provision to the matter before such court, authority or officer.
Rajasthan Revenue Laws (Extension) Act, 1957_Section 8--> State(s): Rajasthan if any difficulty arises in giving effect in the Abu, Ajmer or Sunel area to the provisions of the Rajasthan revenue laws or the rules, regulations, orders and notifications there under, the State Government may, by order notified in the Official Gazette, make such provisions or give such directions as appear to be necessary or expedient for the removal of the difficulty.
Rajasthan Revenue Laws (Extension) Act, 1957_Section 9--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) On and from the appointed day- (a) the enactment mentioned in the Second Schedule. (b) any other laws corresponding to such enactments, and (c) any laws amending the enactments and laws referred to in clauses (a) and (b), shall stand repealed. (2) All rules, regulations, orders and notifications made or issued under the enactments and laws repealed by sub-section (1) shall, on and from the appointed day, stand superseded. (3) The provisions of sections 6 and 9 of the Rajasthan General Clauses Act 1955 (Rajasthan Act 8 of 1955) shall apply to such repeal and supersession. (4) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the provision contained in sub-section (3), any status or property acquired, or any liability incurred, before the commencement of this Act in pursuance of a right conferred, or a duty imposed, by the provisions of the enactments and laws hereby repealed or of the rules, regulations, orders and notifications hereby superseded, shall not be affected by such repeal or supersession, notwithstanding that such status, property or liability is repugnant to, or inconsistent with, or could not be acquired or incurred under the provision of the Rajasthan revenue laws.
Rajasthan Revenue Laws (Extension) Act, 1957_Section Sch.--> State(s): Rajasthan (Note-The amendments made by the First Schedule have been carried over in the Principal Act and, therefore, that schedule has not been printed here separately).
Rajasthan Revenue Laws (Extension) Act, 1957_Section Sch.--> State(s): Rajasthan (See Section 9) List of enactments repealed (1). The Bombay Revenue Jurisdiction Act, 1876. (2). The Bombay Land Revenue Code, 1879. (3). The Bombay Revenue Tribunal Act, 1939. (4). The Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands Act, 1948. In so far as they apply to the Abu area. (5). The Ajmer Talukdars Relief Regulation, 1872. (6). The Ajmer Land and Revenue Regulation, 1877. (7). The Punjab Land Revenue Act, 1887. (8). The Ajmer Alienation of Land Regulation, 1914. (9). The Ajmer Merwara Redemption of Mortgages Regulation, 1928. (10). The Delhi and Ajmer Land Development Act, 1948. (11). The Ajmer Tenancy and Land Records Act, 1950. In so far as they apply to the Ajmer area. (12). The Madhya Bharat Jagir Land Records Management Act, 1949. (13). The Madhya Bharat Land Revenue and Tenancy Act, 1950. In so far as they apply to the Sunel area. 
