Rajasthan Regulation of Boating Act, 1956_Section Preamble--> State(s): Rajasthan An Act to regulate boating in rivers and lakes in the State of Rajasthan. WHEREAS in the interests of the general public it is expedient to regulate boating in rivers and lakes in Rajasthan, in order to ensure the safety of the passengers and the proper running of boats: BE it enacted by the Rajasthan State Legislature in the Seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Rajasthan Regulation of Boating Act, 1956_Section 1--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) This Act may be called the Rajasthan Regulation of Boating Act, 1956.1 (2) it extends to the whole of the State of Rajasthan. (3) It shall come into force on such 2 date as the State Government may, by notification in the Rajasthan Gazette, appoint in this behalf. Received the assent of the President on the 1st day of September. 1956. Came into force w.e.f. 9-7-1959, vide Notification No. D. 3807/F. 17(4) HB/57 dated 22-6-59 published in Rajasthan Gazette Part IV-C. Ordinary, dated. 9-7-1959.
Rajasthan Regulation of Boating Act, 1956_Section 2--> State(s): Rajasthan In this Act, unless the subject or context otherwise requires- 1 (a) "boat" means a boat of any description, not being a steam vessel as defined in clause (5) of section 2 of the Inland Steam Vessels Act, 1917 (Central Act 1 of 1917): (b) "certificate" means a certificate of fitness granted under section 3: (c) "Lake" includes a pond of any kind whether large or small: (d) "license" means a license granted under Section 7: (e) "plying" a boat includes towing or pushing a boat or causing a boat to be plied, towed or pushed, and "to ply" with all its grammatical variations shall be construed accordingly: (f) "river" means a river of any kind whether seasonal or otherwise: 2 [(g) "State" means the new State of Rajasthan as formed by section 10 of the State Reorganisation Act, 1956 (Central Act 37 of 1956:] Substituted by Rajasthan Act No. 25 of 1957. Inserted by Rajasthan Act No. 25 of 1957. In this connection, also see Rajasthan Act No. 40 of 1957. published in Rajasthan Gazette. Part IV-A. Extraordinary, dated 9-12-1957.
Rajasthan Regulation of Boating Act, 1956_Section 3--> State(s): Rajasthan After the expiry of six months from the commencement of this Act, no person shall ply a boat in any river or lake, whether for pleasure or for hire or otherwise, except under the authority, and in accordance with the conditions, of a certificate of fitness in the prescribed manner after an inspection of the boat with reference to the prescribed matters.
Rajasthan Regulation of Boating Act, 1956_Section 4--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) Within thirty days of the transfer of ownership of a boat in respect of which a certificate of fitness has been granted under section 3. the transferee shall report the transfer to the officer or authority granting the certificate and submit the certificate to such officer or authority together with such fees, if any, as may be prescribed. (2) The officer or authority granting the certificate shall return the certificate as early as may be conveniently possible after entering the particulars of the transfer in the records relating to the certificate as well as in the certificate itself.
Rajasthan Regulation of Boating Act, 1956_Section 5--> State(s): Rajasthan If any boat in respect of which a certificate of fitness has been granted is destroyed or rendered unfit for use, the owner thereof shall, within thirty granting the certificate and surrender the certificate for cancellation by such officer or authority and for making any entry thereof in the relevant records.
Rajasthan Regulation of Boating Act, 1956_Section 6--> State(s): Rajasthan The officer or authority granting a certificate may cancel or suspend the certificate, if after giving the owner of the boat a reasonable opportunity of being heard, he is satisfied that the owner has been guilty of a breach or non observance of any provision of this Act or the rules made under this Act or of any conditions embodied in the certificate.
Rajasthan Regulation of Boating Act, 1956_Section 7--> State(s): Rajasthan After the expiry of six months from the commencement of this Act. no person shall ply and boat in any river or lake for hire, except under the authority, and in accordance with the conditions of a license granted under this Act.
Rajasthan Regulation of Boating Act, 1956_Section 8--> State(s): Rajasthan The Regional Transport Officer of the State Government having jurisdiction over the area in which the lake or river is situated, or such other officer as may be prescribed, shall be the officer competent to grant a license under section 7.
Rajasthan Regulation of Boating Act, 1956_Section 9--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) The licensing officer shall while considering an application for licence under this Act, have regard to the following matters, namely:- (a) the interest of the public in general: (b) the safety of passengers and the means available with the licensee to look after it: (c) the advantage to the public likely to result from the service to provided, including the saving of time likely to be affected thereby: (d) the adequacy of the existing service, the fares charged by that service and the effect of that service on the proposed service: (e) the benefit likely to accrue from the proposed service to particular localities.
Rajasthan Regulation of Boating Act, 1956_Section 10--> State(s): Rajasthan The licensing officer may, after giving the licensee a reasonable opportunity of being heard, cancel or suspend a license, if the licensee has been guilty of a breach or non-observance of any of the provisions of this Act or the rules made under this Act or of any condition of his licence.
Rajasthan Regulation of Boating Act, 1956_Section 11--> State(s): Rajasthan The licensing officer shall, having regard to the matters mentioned in section 9, embody such conditions in the licence as he may think necessary in each case with reference to- (a) the number of boats to be plied by the licensee: (b) the place where the licensees boats shall enter the lake or the river; (c) the hours between which boats. may be plied: (d) the mode of navigation and the qualifications of boatmen to be employed by the licensee: (e) the routes which the licensees boats shall follow.
Rajasthan Regulation of Boating Act, 1956_Section 12--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) An appeal shall lie from any order passed under this Act- (a) rejecting an application for the grant of a certificate of fitness: or (b) embodying any condition in such a certificate: or (c) cancelling or suspending any such certificate: or (d) rejecting any application for the grant of a license: or (e) embodying any condition in such a license; or (f) cancelling or suspending any such license. (2) An appeal under sub-section (1) shall lie to such authority as may be prescribed, and different authorities may be prescribed for different kinds of appeals. (3) No appeal under this Act shall be entertained after the expiry of thirty days from the order sought to be appealed from: Provided that the appellate authority may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said period, if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from filing an appeal within the said period.
Rajasthan Regulation of Boating Act, 1956_Section 13--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) The State Government may, be notification in the Rajasthan Gazette, fix the maximum or minimum fares or freight for boats plying for hire, to the applicable throughout the State or within an area or with reference to route within the State, having regard to- (a) the advantage offered to the public, trade and industry by the development of transport by boating; and (b) the desirability of coordinating transport by boating and other forms of transport; and (c) the desirability of preventing uneconomic competition among boats. (2) No notification under sub-section (1) shall be issued unless the representatives of the interests affected have been given a reasonable opportunity of submitting their points of view.
Rajasthan Regulation of Boating Act, 1956_Section 14--> State(s): Rajasthan Whoever commits or abets or attempts to commit a contravention of any of the provisions of this Act, or charges any fares contrary to the provisions of any notification issued under section 13 and for the time being in force shall on conviction, be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees.
Rajasthan Regulation of Boating Act, 1956_Section 15--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) Nothing in this Act applies to boats owned by any department of the Central Government or any State Government which are not plied for hire. (2) The State Government may, by notification in the Rajasthan Gazette exempt any other boat or class of boats from all or any of the provisions of this Act where such exemption appears to the necessary for reasons to be recorded in writing.
Rajasthan Regulation of Boating Act, 1956_Section 16--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) The State Government may, be notification in the Rajasthan Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act. (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, rules made under sub-section (1) may provide for- (a) the form of applications to be made, licenses and certificates to be granted under this Act and the fees to be charged therefor: (b) the procedure for officers authorised under this Act, including the procedure for appeals and the fees for appeals: and (c) all matters that are to be or may be prescribed under any provision of this Act.
Rajasthan Regulation of Boating Act, 1956_Section 17--> State(s): Rajasthan The United State of Rajasthan Regulation of Boating Ordinance 1949 (Ordinance No. V of 1949) of the State of former Rajasthan and all laws in force in any of the Covenanting State, 1 [in the Abu area or Ajmer area or Sunel area] regulating boating in rivers and lakes, are hereby repealed, but not so as to affect their previous operation. Inserted by Rajasthan Act No. 25 of 1957.
Rajasthan Regulation of Boating Act, 1956_Section 18--> State(s): Rajasthan The provisions of the Rajasthan General Clauses Act, 1955 (Rajasthan Act 8 of 1955) in force in the pre-reorganisation State of Rajasthan shall, as far as may be, apply mutatis mutandis to this Act. Inserted by Rajasthan Act No. 25 of 1957. 
