Shekhawati University, Sikar (Change of Name) Act, 2014_Section Preamble--> State(s): Rajasthan An Act to change the name of the Shekhawati University, Sikar and to make certain amendments in the Shekhawati University, Sikar Act, 2012. Be it enacted by the Rajasthan State Legislature in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of India, as follows:-
Shekhawati University, Sikar (Change of Name) Act, 2014_Section 1--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) This Act may be called the Shekhawati University, Sikar (Change of Name) Act, 2014. (2) It shall come into force at once.
Shekhawati University, Sikar (Change of Name) Act, 2014_Section 2--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) The name of the Shekhawati University, Sikar incorporated under the Shekhawati University, Sikar Act, 2012 (Act No. 29 of 2012), hereinafter referred to as the principal Act, shall, as from the date of commencement of this Act, be the Pandit Deendayal Upadhyaya Shekhawati University, Sikar. (2) Any reference to the Shekhawati University, Sikar in any law for the time being in force or in any indenture, instrument or other documents shall be read and construed as a reference to that University under its name as altered by this Act. (3) Nothing in this Act shall affect the continuity of the corporate status of the said University.
Shekhawati University, Sikar (Change of Name) Act, 2014_Section 3--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) As from the date of commencement of this Act, the principal Act shall stand amended to the extent and in the manner specified in the Schedule to this Act. (2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall be without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of section 2.
Shekhawati University, Sikar (Change of Name) Act, 2014_Section 4--> State(s): Rajasthan The principal Act may be cited as the Pandit Deendayal Upadhyaya Shekhawati University, Sikar Act, 2012.
Shekhawati University, Sikar (Change of Name) Act, 2014_Section Sch.--> State(s): Rajasthan (See section 3) Long Title.- In long title, for the existing expression "Shekhawati University at Sikar", the expression "Pandit Deendayal Upadhyaya Shekhawati University at Sikar" shall be substituted. Section 1.- In sub-section (1), for the existing expression "the Shekhawati University, Sikar", the expression "the Pandit Deendayal Upadhyaya Shekhawati University, Sikar" shall be substituted. Section 2.- For the existing clause (o), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:- "(o) "University" means the Pandit Deendayal Upadhyaya Shekhawati University, Sikar incorporated under section 3;". Section 3.- In sub-section (1), for the existing expression "the Shekhawati University, Sikar", the expression "the Pandit Deendayal Upadhyaya Shekhawati University, Sikar" shall be substituted. Principal Secretary to the Government. 
