Agriculture University, Jobner (Change of Name) Act, 2014_Section Preamble--> State(s): Rajasthan An Act to change the name of the Agriculture University, Jobner and to amend the Agriculture University, Jobner Act, 2013. Be it enacted by the Rajasthan State Legislature in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of India, as follows:-
Agriculture University, Jobner (Change of Name) Act, 2014_Section 1--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) This Act may be called the Agriculture University, Jobner (Change of Name) Act, 2014. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on and from 21st September, 2013.
Agriculture University, Jobner (Change of Name) Act, 2014_Section 2--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) The name of the Agriculture University, Jobner incorporated under the Agriculture University, Jobner Act, 2013 (Act No. 20 of 2013), hereinafter referred to as the principal Act, shall, as from the date of commencement of this Act, be the Sri Karan Narendra Agriculture University, Jobner. (2) Any reference to the Agriculture University, Jobner in any law for the time being in force or in any indenture, instrument, or other documents shall be read and construed as a reference to that University under its name as altered by this Act. (3) Nothing in this Act shall affect the continuity of the corporate status of the said University.
Agriculture University, Jobner (Change of Name) Act, 2014_Section 3--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) As from the date of commencement of this Act, the principal Act shall stand amended to the extent and in the manner specified in the schedule. (2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall be without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of section 2.
Agriculture University, Jobner (Change of Name) Act, 2014_Section 4--> State(s): Rajasthan The principal Act may be cited as the Sri Karan Narendra Agriculture University, Jobner Act, 2013.
Agriculture University, Jobner (Change of Name) Act, 2014_Section 5--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) The Agriculture University, Jobner (Change of Name and Amendment) Ordinance, 2013 (Ordinance No. 23 of 2013) is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, all things done, actions taken or orders made under the principal Act as amended by the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done, taken or made under the principal Act as amended by this Act.
Agriculture University, Jobner (Change of Name) Act, 2014_Section Sch.--> State(s): Rajasthan (See section 3) Section 1.- In sub-section (1), for the existing expression "the Agriculture University, Jobner Act", the expression "the Sri Karan Narendra Agriculture University, Jobner Act" shall be substituted. Section 2.- For the existing clause (z), the following shall be substituted, namely:- "(z) "University" means the Sri Karan Narendra Agriculture University, Jobner as established and constituted under this Act;". Section 3.- In sub-section (1), for the existing expression "the Agriculture University, Jobner", the expression "the Sri Karan Narendra Agriculture University, Jobner" shall be substituted. Principal Secretary to the Government. 
