Ajmer Shamlat Committees (Dissolution) Act, 1963_Section Preamble--> State(s): Rajasthan An Act to provide for the dissolution of Shamlat Committees functioning in the Ajmer area. Be it enacted by the Rajasthan State Legislature in the Fourteenth Year of the Republic of India as follows :-
Ajmer Shamlat Committees (Dissolution) Act, 1963_Section 1--> State(s): Rajasthan This Act may be called the Ajmer Shamlat Committees (Dissolution) Act, 1963.1 (2) It shall come into force on such date2 as the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. Received the assent of the Governor on the 7th day of November, 1963. Came into force on 15.2.1964, vide Notification F.6(8)Rev./B/60(i), dated 12.2.1964, Raj. G.G. 4-C, Ext, dated 12-2-1964.
Ajmer Shamlat Committees (Dissolution) Act, 1963_Section 2--> State(s): Rajasthan In this Act, unless the subject or context otherwise requires,- (a) "Appointed date" means the date notified under sub-sec. (2) of Sec. 1, and (b) "Shamlat Committee" means a Shamlat Committee within the Ajmer area formed under, or in pursuance of, the executive orders of the Commissioner, Ajmer, or any non-statutory rules made by him, or Sec. 180 of the Ajmer Tenancy and Land Records Act, 1950 (Central Act 42 of 1950), since repealed, or a decree or order of a court of competent jurisdiction.
Ajmer Shamlat Committees (Dissolution) Act, 1963_Section 3--> State(s): Rajasthan As from the appointed date, all Shamlat Committees functioning in the Ajmer area shall stand dissolved.
Ajmer Shamlat Committees (Dissolution) Act, 1963_Section 4--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any law for the time being in force, or in any agreement, instrument, custom or usage, or in any decree or order of any court or other authority- (i) all lands, rights, title, interests, moneys, properties-movable and immovable-and other assets of a Shamlat Committee dissolved by Sec. 3 shall, as from the appointed date, vest in the State Government, and (ii) all liabilities of such Shamlat Committee shall, as from the said date, be the liabilities of the State Government to the extent only of the lands, rights, title, interests, properties-movable and immovable-and other assets thereof vesting in it under clause (i) of this sub-section. (2) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, transfer any such assets and liabilities to such Local Authorities as may be mentioned in the notification and may, in doing so, impose any terms and conditions upon which such assets and liabilities shall be so transferred.
Ajmer Shamlat Committees (Dissolution) Act, 1963_Section 5--> State(s): Rajasthan Every person, who may, immediately before the appointed date, be employed in connection with the affairs of a Shamlat Committee dissolved by Sec. 3, may either be discharged on terms and conditions applicable to his employment as such, or continue in such employment on such terms and conditions as may be prescribed.
Ajmer Shamlat Committees (Dissolution) Act, 1963_Section 6--> State(s): Rajasthan No person shall be entitled to receive any compensation for any loss suffered or alleged to have been suffered under or in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act.
Ajmer Shamlat Committees (Dissolution) Act, 1963_Section 7--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of this Act. (2) All rules made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after they are so made, before the House of the State Legislature while it is in session, for a period of not less than fourteen days, which may be comprised in one session or in two successive sessions; and, if, before the expiry of the session in which they are so laid or of the session immediately following, the House of the State Legislature makes any modification in any of such rules or resolves that any such rule should not be made, such rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form, or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done there under. 
