Rajasthan Animals and Birds Sacrifice (Prohibition) Act, 1975_Section Preamble--> State(s): Rajasthan An Act to prohibit sacrifice of animals and birds in, or within the premises of the temples or places of public religious worship in the State of Rajasthan. Be it enacted by the Rajasthan State Legislature in the Twenty- sixth Year of the Republic of India, as follows:-
Rajasthan Animals and Birds Sacrifice (Prohibition) Act, 1975_Section 1--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) This Act shall be tailed the Rajasthan Animals and Birds Sacrifice (Prohibition) Act, 1975. (2) It shall extend to whole of the State of Rajasthan. (3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the State Government, may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. Came into force w.e.f. 24-4-1975 vide Notification No. S.O. 11/F. 23(9) H/XIV/72, dated 24-4-1975 published in the Rajasthan Gazette, Extraordinary, Part IV-C (II), dated 24-4-1975.
Rajasthan Animals and Birds Sacrifice (Prohibition) Act, 1975_Section 2--> State(s): Rajasthan In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- (a) Temple Premises' means a mandap, building attached to the temple, and a land attached to the temple, which is generally used for the purpose of worship, in the temple, whether such land is a property of the temple or not, and includes whole of the area attached to the temple, where a fair is organised or a Yatra is performed; (b) Sacrifice means killing or mutilating an animal or a bird with the intention or for the purpose, of pleasing a deity or a God; (c) Temple means a place, know by whatever name; which is being used as a public place of religious worship and dedicated as a public place of religious worship, and (d) Place of public religious worship means any place intended for use by, or accessible to, the public or a section thereof; for the purposes of religious worship or adoration.
Rajasthan Animals and Birds Sacrifice (Prohibition) Act, 1975_Section 3--> State(s): Rajasthan No person shall sacrifice an animal or a bird, or assist in sacrificing it in a temple or within the premises thereof, or in any other place of public religious worship.
Rajasthan Animals and Birds Sacrifice (Prohibition) Act, 1975_Section 4--> State(s): Rajasthan No person shall,- (a) officiate or offer to officiate at, or (b) perform or offer to perform, or (c) serve, assist, or participate, or offer to serve, assist or participate in,- any sacrifice in a temple or its premises or in any other place of public religious worship.
Rajasthan Animals and Birds Sacrifice (Prohibition) Act, 1975_Section 5--> State(s): Rajasthan No person shall, knowingly allow the performance of sacrifice at a place, which is:- (a) situated in a temple or, its premises or in any other place of public religious worship; and (b) in his possession or under his control.
Rajasthan Animals and Birds Sacrifice (Prohibition) Act, 1975_Section 6--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) Whoever shall contravene or assist or abet in contravention of, the provisions of Sec. 3 of this Act, may on conviction, be punishable with imprisonment which may extend upto 6 months or with fine up to Rs. 500/- or with both simultaneously. (2) Whoever shall contravene or assist or abet in contravention of the provisions of Sec. 4 or Sec. 5 of this Act, may be punishable with imprisonment which may extend up to 3 months or with fine up to Rs. 300/- or with both simultaneously.
Rajasthan Animals and Birds Sacrifice (Prohibition) Act, 1975_Section 7--> State(s): Rajasthan The offence falling under this Act shall be heard by a Judicial Magistrate of the First Class.
Rajasthan Animals and Birds Sacrifice (Prohibition) Act, 1975_Section 8--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) If, on receipt of a complaint or any information, the Executive Magistrate is satisfied that a sacrifice is going to be performed in contravention of the provisions of this Act; he may issue an order prohibiting the persons arranging or performing such sacrifice or those connected therewith. (2) Whoever, having known that a prohibitory order has been issued against him under sub-sec. (1), contravenes it, may on conviction, be punishable either with imprisonment which may extend upto 1 year or with fine up to Rs. 1,000/-or with both.
Rajasthan Animals and Birds Sacrifice (Prohibition) Act, 1975_Section 9--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) On receiving the information that a sacrifice has been arranged or has to be performed, the Officer-Incharge of a Police Station, shall, unless there are reasonable grounds which shall be recorded in writing for not believing the said information, make an application to the Executive Magistrate where the sacrifice is going to be performed in contravention of the provisions of this Act for obtaining a prohibitory order under Sec. 8. (2) On receiving the information that an offence under this Act has been committed, the Officer-Incharge of a Police Station shall, unless there are reasonable grounds which shall be recorded in writing for not believing the said information, file a complaint as early as possible before the Judicial Magistrate having jurisdiction to try such offences. 
