Rajasthan Arain Tehsil (Continued Existence) Validating Act, 1962_Section Preamble--> State(s): Rajasthan An Act to provide for, and validate the continued existence of, Arain Tehsil as a separate territorial division and for certain other matters connected therewith. Be it enacted by the Rajasthan State Legislatures in the Thirteenth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Rajasthan Arain Tehsil (Continued Existence) Validating Act, 1962_Section 1--> State(s): Rajasthan This Act may be called the Rajasthan Arain Tehsil (Continued Existence) Validating Act, 1962.1 Received the assent of the Governor on the 19th day of April, 1962
Rajasthan Arain Tehsil (Continued Existence) Validating Act, 1962_Section 2--> State(s): Rajasthan In this Act, unless the subject or context otherwise requires,- (i) "Tehsil Arain" means the territorial division of Tehsil Arain in the Kishangarh sub-division of the State of Rajasthan as existing immediately before the 13th day of January, 1955; (ii) "notification" means the Revenue Department notification No. F. 24 (15) Rev. 1/54 dated 13th January, 1955, issued under Sec. 7 of the Rajasthan Territorial Divisions Ordinance, 1949, and published in the Rajasthan Gazette dated 22nd January, 1955, abolishing Tehsil Arain in Kishangarh sub-division and transferring its villages to Sarwar Tehsil in the same sub-division.
Rajasthan Arain Tehsil (Continued Existence) Validating Act, 1962_Section 3--> State(s): Rajasthan Notwithstanding anything contained in the notification- (i) "Tehsil Arain" shall be deemed always to have continued to exist and shall hereafter continue to exist as a separate territorial division to all intents and for all purposes, (ii) all the villages included in Tehsil Arain shall be deemed never to have been transferred to Sarwar Tehsil in Kishangarh sub-division, and (iii) all actions taken, things done, appointments and transfers made and powers exercised by the State Government or by any officers or authorities subordinate to it in relation to Arain Tehsil treating it is a separate territorial unit of Kishangarh sub-division shall be deemed to have been lawfully taken, done, made and exercised, as if the notification had never been issued.
Rajasthan Arain Tehsil (Continued Existence) Validating Act, 1962_Section 4--> State(s): Rajasthan The said notification is hereby cancelled with effect from 13th day of January, 1955.
Rajasthan Arain Tehsil (Continued Existence) Validating Act, 1962_Section 5--> State(s): Rajasthan The Rajasthan Arain Tehsil (Continued Existence) Validating Ordinance, 1961 (Ordinance No. 11 of 1961) is hereby repealed. 
