Rajasthan Ayurved University (Change of Name) Act, 2011_Section Preamble--> State(s): Rajasthan An Act to change the name of the Rajasthan Ayurved University and to make certain amendments in the Rajasthan Ayurved University Act, 2002. Be it enacted by the Rajasthan State Legislature in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India, as follows:-
Rajasthan Ayurved University (Change of Name) Act, 2011_Section 1--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) This Act may be called the Rajasthan Ayurved University (Change of Name) Act, 2011. (2) It shall come into force at once.
Rajasthan Ayurved University (Change of Name) Act, 2011_Section 2--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) The name of the Rajasthan Ayurved University incorporated under the Rajasthan Ayurved University Act, 2002 (Act No. 15 of 2002), hereinafter referred to as the principal Act, shall, as from the date of commencement of this Act, be "The Dr. Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan Rajasthan Ayurved University, Jodhpur". (2) Any reference to the Rajasthan Ayurved University in any law for the time being in force or in any indenture, instrument or other documents shall be read and construed as a reference to that University under its name as altered by this Act. (3) Nothing in this Act shall affect the continuity of the corporate status of the said University.
Rajasthan Ayurved University (Change of Name) Act, 2011_Section 3--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) As from the date of commencement of this Act, the principal Act shall stand amended to the extent and in the manner specified in the Schedule. (2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall be without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of section 2.
Rajasthan Ayurved University (Change of Name) Act, 2011_Section 4--> State(s): Rajasthan The principal Act may be cited as The Dr. Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan Rajasthan Ayurved University, Jodhpur Act, 2002.
Rajasthan Ayurved University (Change of Name) Act, 2011_Section Sch.1--> State(s): Rajasthan [See Section 3] Section I.- In sub-section (1), for the existing expression "the Rajasthan Ayurved University Act", the expression "the Dr. Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan Rajasthan Ayurved University, Jodhpur Act" shall be substituted. Section 2.- For clause (n), the following clause shall be substituted, namely ;- "(n) 'University' means the Dr. Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan Rajasthan Ayurved University, Jodhpur constituted under this Act;". Section 3.- In sub-section (1), for the existing expression '"The Rajasthan Ayurved University' ", the expression "The Dr. Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan Rajasthan Ayurved University, Jodhpur" shall be substituted. 
