University of Rajasthan (Amendment) Act, 1975_Section Preamble--> State(s): Rajasthan An Act further to amend the University of Rajasthan Act, 1946. Be it enacted by the Rajasthan State Legislature in the Twenty Sixth Year of the republic of India, as follows:-
University of Rajasthan (Amendment) Act, 1975_Section 1--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) This Act may be called the University of Rajasthan (Amendment) Act, 1975.1 (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 10th day of July, 1975. Received the assent of the Governor on the 19th day of August, 1975.
University of Rajasthan (Amendment) Act, 1975_Section 2--> State(s): Rajasthan In the University of Rajasthan Act, 1946, hereinafter referred to as the principal Act in section 13, in sub-section (6), after the expression, "in the University", the expression "and all powers of discipline shall be vested in him" shall be inserted.
University of Rajasthan (Amendment) Act, 1975_Section 3--> State(s): Rajasthan In the principal Act, for section 21, the following section shall be substituted, namely:- "21. Syndicate - (1) The Syndicate shall be the executive body of the university and shall consist of the following persons, namely:- (i) Vice-Chancellor; (ii) two persons nominated by the Vice-Chancellor from amongst the Deans of Faculties or the Principals of the colleges affiliated to the University; (iii) two University Professors nominated by the Vice-Chancellor; (iv) two educationists nominated by the Chancellor; (v) director of College Education, Rajasthan; and (vi) one person nominated by the State Government. (2) Members of the Syndicate, other than the Vice-Chancellor and the Director, College Education, Rajasthan shall hold office for a period of three years from the date of their nomination."
University of Rajasthan (Amendment) Act, 1975_Section 4--> State(s): Rajasthan In section 22 of the principal Act- (i) in clause (g) for the expression "clerical staff and servants of the university, and to define their duties, emoluments and conditions of service and to provide for the filling up of temporary vacancies in their posts", the expression "and to define their duties, emoluments and conditions of a service" shall be substituted; and (ii) clause (m) shall be omitted.
University of Rajasthan (Amendment) Act, 1975_Section 5--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the principal Act, the Syndicate functioning thereunder immediately before the commencement, of this Act shall, upon such commencement, stand dissolved and its members shall, cease to hold office. (2) Notwithstanding such dissolution, all things done, action taken, appointments and orders made shall, to all intents and for all purposes continue to be in force until they are rescinded or modified by the Syndicate re-constituted by section 3 of this Act.
University of Rajasthan (Amendment) Act, 1975_Section 6--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) 1 The University of Rajasthan (Amendment) Ordinance, 1975 is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, all things done and action taken, under the principal Act as amended by the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the principal Act as amended by this Act. Published in Rajasthan Gazette, Extraordinary., Pt. IV-B, dated 10-7-1975 
