University of Rajasthan (Amendment) Act, 1973_Section Preamble--> State(s): Rajasthan An Act further to amend the University of Rajasthan Act, 1946. Be it enacted by the Rajasthan State Legislature in the Twenty fourth Year of the Republic of India, as follows:
University of Rajasthan (Amendment) Act, 1973_Section 1--> State(s): Rajasthan This Act may be called the University of Rajasthan (Amendment) Act, 1973.1 Received the assent of the Governor on the 10th day of November, 1973.
University of Rajasthan (Amendment) Act, 1973_Section 2--> State(s): Rajasthan In sub-section (2) of section 4 of the University of Rajasthan Act, 1946, hereinafter referred to as the principal Act,- (i) The existing clauses (a) and (b) shall be substituted by the following, namely:- "(a) Persons, who have pursued a course of study in the University or its affiliated colleges or approved institutions but appear at and pass the examinations of the University under conditions laid down in the Ordinances and Regulations; (b) Persons who have not pursued a course of study in the University or its affiliated colleges or approved institutions but appear at and pass the examination of the University as non-collegiate students under such conditions as may be prescribed by the University from time to time: Provided that such students have been residing within the State of Rajasthan for such period as may be prescribed by the University in the Ordinance and Regulations." (ii) The existing clause (e) shall be omitted.
University of Rajasthan (Amendment) Act, 1973_Section 3--> State(s): Rajasthan In section 18 of the principal Act, the existing sub-section (2) shall be substituted by the following, namely:- "(2) Members of the Senate, other than ex-officio members, life members and other members elected under clauses (XXV) and (XXVIII) of sub-division III of sub-section (1) shall hold office for a period of five years. The other members elected under clause (XXV) shall hold office for a period of three years and other members elected under clause (XXVIII) shall hold office for one year from the date of election or until fresh elections are held whichever is earlier: Provided that the members continue to be internal students and fulfil the condition as laid down in sub-clauses (b) and (c) of clause (XXVIII) of sub-section (1) above; the burden of proof that the member continues as such and fulfils the requisite conditions shall be on the student concerned and he may be required to produce a certificate to that effect through the Head of Institution: Provided further that on the similar conditions and certification the existing Student Senators elected for the Academic Session 1972-73 will continue to be members beyond 30th June, 1973 till fresh elections are held."
University of Rajasthan (Amendment) Act, 1973_Section 4--> State(s): Rajasthan 1 The University of Rajasthan (Amendment) Ordinance, 1973 (Ordinance No. 9 of 1973) is hereby repealed. Published in Rajasthan Gazatte Exty. Pt. IV-B dt. 10/08/1973 
