Rajasthan Universities Teachers (Absorption of Temporary Lecturers) Act, 1979_Section Preamble--> State(s): Rajasthan An Act to provide for the absorption of temporary lecturers of long/standing, working in the Universities in Rajasthan. Be it enacted by the Rajasthan State Legislature in the Thirtieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Rajasthan Universities Teachers (Absorption of Temporary Lecturers) Act, 1979_Section 1--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) This Act may be called the Rajasthan Universities Teachers (Absorption of Temporary Lecturers) Act, 1979.1 (2) It extends to the whole of the State of Rajasthan. (3) Except section 10, which shall come into force at once, the other provisions of this Act shall be deemed to have come into force on the 8th day of June, 1978. Received the assent of the Governor on the 17th day of April, 1979.
Rajasthan Universities Teachers (Absorption of Temporary Lecturers) Act, 1979_Section 2--> State(s): Rajasthan In this Act, unless the subject or context otherwise requires,- (i) "department concerned" means the department of the University concerned in which the vacancy of a lecturer exists; (ii) "relevant law" means the Rajasthan Universities Teachers and Officers (Special Conditions of the Service) Act, 1974 and any enactment of the Rajasthan State Legislature establishing a University in Rajasthan, and it includes the statutes, Ordinances, bye-law, rules, notifications or orders made thereunder and as amended from time to time; (iii) "Screening Committee" means a Committee appointed under the provisions of this Act to scrutinise the academic record and report(s) about the work and conduct of the temporary lecturers; (iv) "temporary lecturer" means a lecturer appointed in the pay scale prescribed by the University concerned for lecturers and on temporary basis as stop-gap arrangement but shall not include lecturers appointed on contract basis or those in foreign service and serving the University concerned on deputation; (v) "university concerned" means the University in which the temporary lecturers are working; and (vi) "Vice-Chancellor" means the Vice-Commissioner of the University concerned, and includes any person who for the time being performs the functions of the Vice-Commissioner of the University concerned according to the relevant law. (2) All other expressions used but not defined in this Act shall have the meaning respectively assigned to them under the relevant law.
Rajasthan Universities Teachers (Absorption of Temporary Lecturers) Act, 1979_Section 3--> State(s): Rajasthan All temporary lecturers as were appointed as such on or before the 25th day of June, 1975 and were continuing as such at the commencement of the Rajasthan Universities Teachers (Absorption of Temporary Lecturers) Ordinance, 1978 (Ordinance No. 5 of 1978) shall be considered by the University concerned for their absorption and substantive appointment on the recommendation of the Screening Committee constituted under section 4 or section 5, as the case may be subject to their fulfilling the conditions of eligibility including minimum qualifications prescribed by the University concerned under the relevant law as applicable on the respective dates of their temporary appointments and subject also to the availability of substantive vacancies of lecturers in the department concerned.
Rajasthan Universities Teachers (Absorption of Temporary Lecturers) Act, 1979_Section 4--> State(s): Rajasthan The Screening Committee shall consist of the following:- (1) Vice-Chancellor of the University concerned who shall be Chairman of the Committee; (ii) The Head of the Department concerned of the University; (iii) The Dean of the faculty concerned; (iv) The senior-most Professor/Reader of the Department if he is not the Head of the Department; and (v) One expert, not connected with the University and having special knowledge in the subject in which the lecturer is to be screened, to be nominated by the Chancellor.
Rajasthan Universities Teachers (Absorption of Temporary Lecturers) Act, 1979_Section 5--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 7 or any other provision of the Rajasthan Universities Teachers (Absorption of Temporary Lecturers) Ordinance, 1978 (Ordinance No. 5 of 1978), the services of temporary lecturer, who was considered for substantive appointment by a Screening Committee but was not found suitable, shall be deemed not to have terminated and he shall continue to be a temporary lecturer till he is again considered for substantive appointment under section 3 after his re-screening under sub-section (2) of this section. (2) A temporary lecturer who was considered for substantive appointment by the Screening Committee referred to in section 4, but was not found suitable shall be again considered by the Screening Committee reconstituted in the same manner as it provided in that section.
Rajasthan Universities Teachers (Absorption of Temporary Lecturers) Act, 1979_Section 6--> State(s): Rajasthan The lecturers appointed to the substantive posts in pursuance of the provisions of the Rajasthan Universities Teachers (Absorption of Temporary Lecturers) Ordinance, 1978 (Ordinance No. 5 of 1978) or of this Act, shall be deemed to have been appointed under the provisions of the Rajasthan Universities Teachers and Officers (Special Conditions of Service) Act, 1974 (Act No. 18 of 1974).
Rajasthan Universities Teachers (Absorption of Temporary Lecturers) Act, 1979_Section 7--> State(s): Rajasthan No appointment in pursuance of this Act shall be made after the expiry of the 31st day of August, 1979.
Rajasthan Universities Teachers (Absorption of Temporary Lecturers) Act, 1979_Section 8--> State(s): Rajasthan The services of a temporary lecturer who is considered for substantive appointment under sections 3, 4 and 5 but is not substantively appointed on or before the 31st day of August, 1979 shall stand terminated on the expiry of that day.
Rajasthan Universities Teachers (Absorption of Temporary Lecturers) Act, 1979_Section 9--> State(s): Rajasthan The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything contained in the relevant law.
Rajasthan Universities Teachers (Absorption of Temporary Lecturers) Act, 1979_Section 10--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) The Rajasthan Universities Teachers (Absorption of Temporary Lecturers) Ordinance. 1978 (Ordinance No. 5 of 1978) and the Rajasthan Universities Teachers (Absorption of Temporary Lecturers) (Amendment) Ordinance, 1978 (Ordinance No. 8 of 1978) are hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal but subject to the provisions of sub-section (1) of section 5 of this Act anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinances shall be deemed to have done or taken under the Act. 
