University of Rajputana (Change of Name) Act, 1956_Section Preamble--> State(s): Rajasthan An Act to change the name of the University of Rajputana and to make certain miscellaneous amendments to the University of Rajasthan Acts. Be it enacted by the Rajasthan State Legislature in the Seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
University of Rajputana (Change of Name) Act, 1956_Section 1--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) This Act may be called the University of Rajputana (Change of Name) Act, 1956.1 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the state Government may by notification in the official Gazette, appoint in this behalf.2 Received the assent of the Governor on the 28th day of December, 1956. Came into force with effect from 1-7-1957 vide Notification No. F. 1(1) Edu. (B)/52, dated 22-2-1957. Pub. in Raj. Gaz., Pt. IV-C, dated 28-3-1957.
University of Rajputana (Change of Name) Act, 1956_Section 2--> State(s): Rajasthan In this Act, "Covenanting State" has the meaning assigned to it by the Rajasthan General Clauses Act, 1955 (Act 8 of 1955) of the pre-reorganisation State of Rajasthan).
University of Rajputana (Change of Name) Act, 1956_Section 3--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) The name of the University incorporated under the University of Rajputana Acts of the Covenanting State (hereinafter referred to as the Principal Acts) shall, as form the date of commencement of this Act, be "The University of Rajasthan". (2) Any reference to the University of Rajputana in any law for the time being in force or in any indenture, instrument or other document shall be read and construed as a reference to that University under its name as altered by this Act. (3) Noting in this Act shall affect the continuity of the corporate status of the said University.
University of Rajputana (Change of Name) Act, 1956_Section 4--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) As from the date of commencement of this Act, the Principal Acts shall stand amended to the extent and in the manner specified in the Schedule. (2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall be without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of section 3.
University of Rajputana (Change of Name) Act, 1956_Section 5--> State(s): Rajasthan The Principal Acts may be cited together as the University of Rajasthan Act.
University of Rajputana (Change of Name) Act, 1956_Section Sch.--> State(s): Rajasthan (See section 4) Amendment in the Principal Acts. Section 2 - For clause (f) the following shall be substituted, namely; "(f) University means the University of Rajasthan". Section 3 - In sub-section (1), for the words "The University of Rajputana" the words "The University of Rajasthan" shall be substituted. Section 21.-In sub-section (1):- (i) for clause (ii), the following shall be substituted, namely:- "(ii) the Deans of all the faculties." (ii) clause (iii) shall be omitted. 
