University of Rajasthan (Amendment) Act, 1981_Section Preamble--> State(s): Rajasthan An Act further to amend the University of Rajasthan Act, 1946. Be it enacted by the Rajasthan State Legislature in the Thirty-second Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
University of Rajasthan (Amendment) Act, 1981_Section 1--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) This Act may be called the University of Rajasthan (Amendment) Act, 1981.1 (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 19th day of May, 1981. Received the assent of Shri Kalyan Dutta Sharma discharging the function of the Governor of Rajasthan on the 3rd day of October, 1981.
University of Rajasthan (Amendment) Act, 1981_Section 2--> State(s): Rajasthan For Sec. 21 of the University of Rajasthan Act, 1946, hereinafter referred to as the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely:- "21. Syndicate - (1) The Syndicate shall be the executive body of the University and shall consist of the following persons, namely:- (i) Vice-Chancellor; (ii) Pro-Vice-Chancellor; (iii) two persons nominated by the Vice-Chancellor; other than Deans; (iv) one educationists nominated by the Chancellor; (v) two Principals to be nominated by the State Government; (vi) Director, College Education, Rajasthan; (vii) two persons to be nominated by the State Government; (viii) two teachers, who have put in not less than seven years teaching experience in the institutions of higher education in Rajasthan on 1st January immediately preceding the year in which elections are held, other than University Professors, Deans, Principals of affiliated/constituent colleges to be elected by the teachers separately from amongst themselves as below: (a) one teacher to be elected from amongst themselves by the teachers of the University teaching departments and constituent colleges; (b) one teacher to be elected from amongst themselves by the teachers of the affiliated colleges; (ix) two members of the State Legislature to be nominated by the State Government; (x) (a) one person elected by the senate from amongst the students of the University teaching departments and constituent colleges who are elected as other member of the senate under clause (xxviii) of sub-division III sub-sec. (1) of Sec. 18 and the ex-officio member of the senate under clause (xii-A) of sub- division I of sub-sec. (1) of the said Section; (b) one person elected by the senate from amongst the students of all affiliated colleges who are elected as other members of the senate under clause (xxviii) of sub-division III of sub-sec. (1) of Sec. 18. Explanation - The student members elected under clause (xi) shall not be associated with the- (a) appointment of examiners; (b) finance; (c) selection of the employees of the University; (2) The members of the Syndicate other than the Vice-Chancellor, Pro-Vice-Chancellor and Director, College Education shall hold office for a period of three years from the date of their nomination or election, as the case may be.
University of Rajasthan (Amendment) Act, 1981_Section 3--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the principal Act, the Syndicate functioning there under immediately before the commencement of this Act shall, upon such commencement, stand dissolved and its members shall ceases to hold office. (2) Notwithstanding such dissolution, all things done, actions taken, appointments and orders made by the Syndicate dissolved under sub-sec. (1) shall, to all intents and for all purpose, continue to be in force until they are rescinded or modified by the Syndicate re-constituted by Sec. 2 of this Act.
University of Rajasthan (Amendment) Act, 1981_Section 4--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) The University of Rajasthan (Amendment) Ordinance, 1981 (Ordinance No. 3 of 1981) is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal anything done or any action taken under the Principal Act as amended by the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the principal Act as amended by this Act. 
