University of Rajasthan (Amendment) Act, 1987_Section Preamble--> State(s): Rajasthan An Act further to amend the University of Rajasthan Act, 1946. Be it enacted by the Rajasthan State Legislature in the Thirty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
University of Rajasthan (Amendment) Act, 1987_Section 1--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) This Act may be called the University of Rajasthan (Amendment) act, 1987.1 (2) It shall and shall be deemed to have come into force on such date as the State Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, appoint. Received the Assent of the Governor on the 7th day of November, 1987
University of Rajasthan (Amendment) Act, 1987_Section 2--> State(s): Rajasthan For section 5 of the University of Rajasthan Act, 1946, hereinafter referred to as the principal Act, the following shall be substituted, namely:- "5. Territorial exercise of powers - The jurisdiction of the University shall extend to, and the powers conferred by or under this Act shall exercisable in, all the University departments at Jaipur, its constituent colleges, institutions and institutes, all such colleges, institutions and institutes in the State as provide instruction in various systems of medicine and the Malviya Regional Engineering College, Jaipur and the Engineering College, Kota."
University of Rajasthan (Amendment) Act, 1987_Section 3--> State(s): Rajasthan In section 45 of the University of Rajasthan Act, 1946 (a) in the marginal-heading, the words "at the commencement of the Act", appearing after the words "Removal of difficulties" shall be deleted; and (b) between the words "the provisions thereof", and the words "the Government", the words "and in giving effect to the provisions of the University of Rajasthan (Amendment) Act, 1987," shall be inserted.
University of Rajasthan (Amendment) Act, 1987_Section 4--> State(s): Rajasthan After the existing section 45 of the University of Rajasthan Act, 1946, the following shall be inserted, namely:- "45-A. Special Provision - Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, the Chancellor may, in order to give effect to the provisions of the University of Rajasthan (Amendment) Act, 1987, in consultation with the State Government, make such orders, as are deemed necessary, for the transfer of- (a) any officer, teacher, employee or servant; (b) any movable or immovable property or any rights or interests therein; (c) any fund, grant, contribution, donation, aid or benefaction received, accrued or promised; (d) any dues, liabilities or obligations incurred or lawfully subsisting in favour of or against the University; (e) any will, deed or other document containing any bequest, gift or trust; From the University to any other University on such terms and conditions as may be determined in the orders".
University of Rajasthan (Amendment) Act, 1987_Section 5--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) The University of Rajasthan (Amendment) Ordinance, 1987 (Ordinance No. 15 of 1987) is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal all things done, actions taken or orders made under the principal Act as amended by the aforesaid Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done, taken or made under the principal Act as amended by this Act. 
