University of Rajasthan (Amendment) Act, 1977_Section Preamble--> State(s): Rajasthan An Act further to amend the University of Rajasthan Act, 1946 Be it enacted by the Rajasthan State Legislature in the Twenty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
University of Rajasthan (Amendment) Act, 1977_Section 1--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) This Act may be called the University of Rajasthan (Amendment) Act, 19771 (2) It shall come into force at once. Received the assent of the Governor on the 19th day of August,1977.
University of Rajasthan (Amendment) Act, 1977_Section 2--> State(s): Rajasthan Sub-clause (b) of clause (xxv) of sub-section (1) of section 18 of the University of Rajasthan Act, 1946 hereinafter referred to as the principal Act, shall be deleted.
University of Rajasthan (Amendment) Act, 1977_Section 3--> State(s): Rajasthan In the principal Act, for section 21, the following section shall be substitution, namely:- "21. Syndicate-(1) The Syndicate shall be the executive body of the University and shall consist of the following persons, namely:- (i) Vice-Chancellor; (ii) Director of College Education; (iii) Two eminent educationists to be nominated by the Chancellor; (iv) Two Deans of Faculties, to be nominated by the Vice-Chancellor, in rotation, in accordance with their inter-se seniority as Deans; (v) Two Professors of University departments to be nominated by the Vice-Chancellor, in rotation, in occurrence with their inter-se seniority as Professors; (vi) Four Principals to be elected in their respective categories as mentioned below:- (a) One to be elected from amongst themselves by the Principals of Post Graduate colleges affiliated to the University excluding professional colleges; (b) One to be elected from amongst themselves by the Principals of the professional colleges affiliated to the University; (c) Two to be elected from amongst themselves by the Principals of the degree colleges affiliated to the University excluding the professional Colleges. Explanation - For the purposes of this clause "Professional colleges" shall mean, the colleges affiliated to the University in the Faculties of Engineering and Technology, Medicine and Pharmaceutics, Ayurveda, Law and Education: Provided that such colleges are affiliated exclusively in the aforesaid Faculties. (vii) Three teachers, who have put in not less than seven years teaching experience in the institution of higher education in Rajasthan on 1st January immediately preceding the year in which elections are held, other than University Professors, Deans, Principals of affiliated/constituent colleges, to be elected by the teachers separately from amongst themselves as below:- (a) One teacher to be elected from amongst themselves by the teachers of the University teaching Departments and constituent colleges. (b) Two teachers to be elected from amongst themselves by the teachers of the affiliated colleges. (viii) Two persons, to be elected by the Senate from amongst its non-teacher and non-student members who are not the employees of the University or any of the colleges affiliated to it. (ix) Two members of State Legislature to be nominated by the Speaker; (x) (a) One person elected by the Senate from amongst the students of the University teaching departments and constituent colleges who are elected as other members of the Senate under clause (xxviii)of sub-division III of sub-section (1) of section 18 and the ex-officio members of the Senate under clause (xiii) (A) of sub-division 1 of sub-section (1) of the said section. (b) One person elected by the Senate from amongst the students of all affiliated colleges who are elected as other members of the Senate under clause (xxviii) of sub-division III of sub-section (1) of section 18. Explanation - (i) The expression eminent educationists means a person who has had close association with an institution of higher learning for a considerable period of time or who has made distinctive contribution in the field of education and learning or in the sphere of educational administration. (ii) The student members elected under clause (x) shall not associated with the- (a) appointment of examiners; (b) finance; (c) selection of the employees of the University. (iii) The inter se seniority of the Principals of Government and aided colleges shall be as determined by the Director of College Education and of others as determined by the Vice-Chancellor. (2) The members of Syndicate other than the Vice-Chancellor and Director of College Education shall hold office for a period of three years from the date of their nomination or election, as the case may be. (3) No person referred to in clauses (iii) to (x) of sub-section (1) shall be eligible for election and/or nomination for more than two terms."
University of Rajasthan (Amendment) Act, 1977_Section 4--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the principal Act the Syndicate functioning there under immediately before the commencement of this Act shall, upon such commencement stand dissolved and its members shall cease to hold office. (2) Notwithstanding such dissolution, all thing done, actions taken, appointments and orders made, by the Syndicate dissolved under sub-section (1) shall, to all intents and for all purpose continue to be in force until they are rescinded or modified by the Syndicate reconstituted by section 3 of this Act. 
