University of Rajasthan (Amendment) Act, 1978_Section Preamble--> State(s): Rajasthan An Act further to amend the University of Rajasthan Act, 1946. Be it enacted by the Rajasthan State Legislature in the Twenty-ninth Year of the Republic of India, as follows:-
University of Rajasthan (Amendment) Act, 1978_Section 1--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) This Act may be called the University of Rajasthan (Amendment) Act, 1978. 1 (2) Except section 8; which shall come into force, at once, the other provisions of this act shall be deemed to have come into force on the 18th day of September, 1978. Received the assent of the Governor on the 13th day of November, 1978.
University of Rajasthan (Amendment) Act, 1978_Section 2--> State(s): Rajasthan In section 9 of the University of Rajasthan Act, 1946, hereinafter referred to as the principal Act, after clause (ii), the following new clause shall be inserted, namely:- "(iia) The Pro-Vice-Chancellor".
University of Rajasthan (Amendment) Act, 1978_Section 3--> State(s): Rajasthan Sub-section (7) of section 12 of the principal Act, shall be substituted by the following, namely:- "(7) When a temporary vacancy in the office of the Vice- Chancellor occurs by reason of leave, illness or otherwise, the Pro-Vice-Chancellor shall carry on the office of the Vice-Chancellor. Where, however, there is no Pro-Vice-Chancellor or he is also temporarily absent, the Syndicate shall forthwith report the same to the Chancellor who shall make such arrangements for carrying on the office of Vice-Chancellor as he may deem fit".
University of Rajasthan (Amendment) Act, 1978_Section 4--> State(s): Rajasthan After section 13 of the principal Act, the following new section shall be inserted, namely:- "13A. The Pro-Vice-Chancellor -(1) The Pro-Vice-Chancellor may be a whole time or part time officer of the University and shall be appointed by the Chancellor in consultation with the Vice-Chancellor. (2) The Pro-Vice-Chancellor shall hold office for a period of three years and shall be eligible for re-appointment for a second term and such re-appointment shall be made in the manner prescribed in subsection (1): Provided that no person shall be appointed as Pro-Vice-Chancellor for more than two terms: Provided further that Notwithstanding the expiry of his terrn, the Pro-Vice-Chancellor shall continue to hold his office until his successor is appointed and enters upon his office. (3) The emoluments and other conditions of service of the Pro-Vice-Chancellor shall be such as may be prescribed by the Statutes: Provided that the emoluments and the conditions of service of the first Pro-Vice-Chancellor shall be such as are specified by the Chancellor. (4) The Pro-Vice-Chancellor may, at any time, relinquish his office by submitting, not less than sixty days in advance of the ate on which he wishes to be relieved, his resignation to the Vice-Chancellor, or if there be no Vice-Chancellor to the Chancellor. (5) Subject to the control and supervision of the Vice-Chancellor, the Pro-Vice-Chancellor shall exercise the powers and perform the functions as specified below:- (a) Implementation of decisions taken by various bodies of the University such as, the Senate, the Syndicate and the Academic Council; (b) Attending to all matters relating to affiliated colleges; (c) Appointment of clerical staff of the University except those for which powers have been delegated to the Registrar; (d) Disciplinary powers in respect of above staff; (e) Attending to all matters relating to students welfare etc; and (f) Perform such other duties and functions and exercise such other powers as the Vice-Chancellor may specify in general or in individual cases and shall assist the Vice-Chancellor in all matters, academic and administrative".
University of Rajasthan (Amendment) Act, 1978_Section 5--> State(s): Rajasthan In sub-section (1) of section 18 of the Principal Act, after clause (ii), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:- "(iia) The Pro-Vice-Chancellor".
University of Rajasthan (Amendment) Act, 1978_Section 6--> State(s): Rajasthan In sub-section (1) of section 21 of the Principal Act, after clause (i) the following new clause shall be inserted, namely:- "(ia) The Pro-Vice-Chancellor".
University of Rajasthan (Amendment) Act, 1978_Section 7--> State(s): Rajasthan In sub-section (1) of section 23 of the principal Act, clause (i) the following new clause shall be inserted, namely:- "(ia) The Pro-Vice-Chancellor".
University of Rajasthan (Amendment) Act, 1978_Section 8--> State(s): Rajasthan (i) The University of Rajasthan (Amendment) Ordinance, 1978 (Ordinance No. 16 of 1978) is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal anything done or any action taken under the principal Act as amended by the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the principal Act as amended by the Act. 
