Rajasthan Universities' Teachers and Officers (Selection for Appointment) (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section Preamble--> State(s): Rajasthan An Act further to amend the Rajasthan Universities' Teachers and Officers (Selection for Appointment) Act, 1974. Be it enacted by the Rajasthan State Legislature in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India, as follows:-
Rajasthan Universities' Teachers and Officers (Selection for Appointment) (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 1--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) This Act may be called the Rajasthan Universities' Teachers and Officers (Selection for Appointment) (Amendment) Act, 2011. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on and from 25th November, 2010.
Rajasthan Universities' Teachers and Officers (Selection for Appointment) (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 2--> State(s): Rajasthan In sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Rajasthan Universities' Teachers and Officers (Selection for Appointment) Act, 1974 (Act No. 18 of 1974), hereinafter referred to as the principal Act, after clause (vii) and before clause (viii), the following new clause shall be inserted:- "(vii-a) "Special Backward Classes" means the classes declared as such by the State Government, by notification in the Official Gazette;".
Rajasthan Universities' Teachers and Officers (Selection for Appointment) (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 3--> State(s): Rajasthan After section 10-A of the principal Act, the following new section 10-B shall be inserted:- "10-B. Reservation of posts for Special Backward Classes. - Notwithstanding anything contained in the relevant law, as from the date of commencement of the Rajasthan Universities' Teachers and Officers (Selection for Appointment) (Amendment) Act, 2011 (Act No. 4 of 2011) there shall be reserved in the University concerned, one percent posts for Special Backward Classes for appointment to the posts of teachers and officers to be appointed in the University in pursuance of every selection made under this Act.".
Rajasthan Universities' Teachers and Officers (Selection for Appointment) (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 4--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) The Rajasthan Universities' Teachers and Officers (Selection for Appointment) (Amendment) Ordinance, 2010 (Ordinance No. 02 of 2010) is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, all things done, actions taken or orders made under the principal Act as amended by the aforesaid Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done, taken or made under the principal Act as amended by this Act. Principal Secretary to the Government. 
