Rajasthan University of Health Sciences (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section Preamble--> State(s): Rajasthan An Act to amend the Rajasthan University of Health Sciences Act, 2005. Be it enacted by the Rajasthan State Legislature in the Sixty-fourth Year of the Republic of India, as follows:-
Rajasthan University of Health Sciences (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 1--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) This Act may be called the Rajasthan University of Health Sciences (Amendment) Act, 2013. (2) It shall come into force at once.
Rajasthan University of Health Sciences (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 2--> State(s): Rajasthan For the existing section 8 of the Rajasthan University of Health Sciences Act, 2005 (Act No. 1 of 2005), hereinafter referred to as the principal Act, the following shall be substituted, namely:- "8. Visitation. - (1) The Chancellor shall have the right to cause an inspection, to be made by such person or persons as he or she may direct- (a) of the University, its building, laboratories, libraries, museums, workshops and equipments; or (b) of any college, institute, institution or hostel maintained by the University; or (c) of the teaching and other work conducted or done by the University; or (d) of the conduct of any examination held by the University. (2) The Chancellor shall also have the right to cause an inquiry to be made by such person or persons as he or she may direct in respect of any matter connected with the University. (3) The Chancellor shall, in every case, give notice to the University of his or her intention to cause an inspection or inquiry to be made and the University shall be entitled to be represented at such inspection or inquiry. (4) The Chancellor shall communicate to the University his or her views with reference to the result of such inspection or inquiry and may, after ascertaining the opinion of the University thereon, advise the University upon the action to be taken and fix a time limit for taking such action. (5) The University shall, within the time limit so fixed, report to the Chancellor, the action taken or proposed to be taken on the advice tendered by the Chancellor. (6) If the University does not take action within the time limit fixed, or if the action taken by the University is, in the opinion of the Chancellor, not satisfactory, the Chancellor may, after considering any explanation offered or representation made by the University, issue such direction as he or she may deem fit and the University shall comply with such direction. (7) If the University does not comply with such direction issued as per sub-section (6) within such time as may be fixed in that behalf by the Chancellor, the Chancellor shall at his or her discretion have power to appoint any person or body to implement such direction and make such order as may be necessary for the expenses thereof.".
Rajasthan University of Health Sciences (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 3--> State(s): Rajasthan For the existing section 11 of the principal Act, the following shall be substituted, namely:- "11. Vice-Chancellor. - (1) The Vice-Chancellor shall be a whole time paid officer of the University and shall be appointed by the Chancellor in consultation with the State Government upon recommendation of a Selection Committee consisting of- (a) one person nominated by the Board not connected with the University or any college thereof; (b) Director General, Indian Council of Medical Research or his nominee; (c) one person nominated by the Chancellor; and (d) one person nominated by the State Government, and the Chancellor shall appoint one of these persons to be the Chairman of the Committee. (2) The term of the office of the Vice-Chancellor shall be five years from the date on which he or she enters upon his or her office or until he or she attains the age of seventy years, whichever is earlier: Provided that the same person shall be eligible for reappointment for a second term. (3) The Vice-Chancellor shall receive such pay and allowances as may be determined by the State Government. In addition to it, he or she shall be entitled to free furnished residence maintained by the University and such other perquisites as may be prescribed. (4) When a permanent vacancy in the office of the Vice-Chancellor occurs by reason of his or her death, resignation, removal or the expiry of his or her term of office, it shall be filled by the Chancellor in accordance with sub-section (1), and for so long as it is not so filled, stop-gap arrangement shall be made by him or her under and in accordance with sub-section (5). (5) When a temporary vacancy in the office of the Vice-Chancellor occurs by reason of leave, suspension or otherwise or when a stop-gap arrangement is necessary under sub-section (4), the Registrar shall forthwith report the matter to the Chancellor who shall make, on the advice of the State Government, arrangement for the carrying on of the function of the office of the Vice-Chancellor. (6) The Vice-Chancellor may at any time relinquish office by submitting, not less than sixty days in advance of the date on which he or she wishes to be relieved, his or her resignation to the Chancellor. (7) Such resignation shall take effect from the date determined by the Chancellor and conveyed to the Vice-Chancellor. (8) Where a person appointed as the Vice-Chancellor was in employment before such appointment in any other college, institution or University, he or she may continue to contribute to the provident fund of which he or she was a member in such employment and the University shall contribute to the account of such person in that provident fund. (9) Where the Vice-Chancellor had been in his or her previous employment, a member of any insurance or pension scheme, the University shall make a necessary contribution to such scheme. (10) The Vice-Chancellor shall be entitled to travelling and daily allowance at such rates as may be fixed by the Board. (11) The Vice-Chancellor shall be entitled to leave as under:- (a) leave on full pay at the rate of one day for every eleven days of active service; and (b) leave on half pay at the rate of twenty days for each completed year of service: Provided that leave on half pay may be commuted as leave on full pay on production of medical certificate.'.
Rajasthan University of Health Sciences (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 4--> State(s): Rajasthan The existing provision of section 36 of the principal Act, shall be renumbered as sub-section (2) thereof and before sub-section (2) as so renumbered the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:- "(1) The State Government shall have the right to cause an inquiry to be made, by such person or persons as it may direct, and to issue directions to the University, in respect of any matter connected with the finances of the University, where State Government funds are concerned.". Principal Secretary to the Government. 
