VIT University, Jaipur (Change of Name) Act, 2013_Section Preamble--> State(s): Rajasthan An Act to change the name of the VIT University, Jaipur and to make certain amendments in the VIT University, Jaipur Act, 2012. Be it enacted by the Rajasthan State Legislature in the Sixty-fourth Year of the Republic of India, as follows:-
VIT University, Jaipur (Change of Name) Act, 2013_Section 1--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) This Act may be called the VIT University, Jaipur (Change of Name) Act, 2013.1 (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on and from 7th June, 2013. Received the assent of the Governor on 15th day of September, 2013
VIT University, Jaipur (Change of Name) Act, 2013_Section 2--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) The name of the VIT University, Jaipur incorporated under the VIT University, Jaipur Act, 2012 (Act No. 11 of 2012), hereinafter referred to as the principal Act, shall, as from the date of commencement of this Act, be "The Vivekananda Global University, Jaipur". (2) Any reference to the VIT University, Jaipur in any law for: the time being in force or in any indenture, instrument, or other documents shall be read and construed as a reference to that University under its name as altered by this Act. (3) Nothing in this Act shall affect the continuity of the corporate status of the said University.
VIT University, Jaipur (Change of Name) Act, 2013_Section 3--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) As from the date of commencement of this Act, the principal Act shall stand amended to the extent and in the manner specified in the schedule. (2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall be without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of Section 2.
VIT University, Jaipur (Change of Name) Act, 2013_Section 4--> State(s): Rajasthan The principal Act may be cited as the Vivekananda Global University, Jaipur Act, 2012.
VIT University, Jaipur (Change of Name) Act, 2013_Section 5--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) The VIT University, Jaipur (Change of Name) Ordinance, 2013 (Ordinance No.8 of 2013) is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, all things done, actions taken or orders made under the principal Act as amended by the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done, taken or made under the principal Act as amended by this Act.
VIT University, Jaipur (Change of Name) Act, 2013_Section Sch.--> State(s): Rajasthan [See Section 3] Preamble - In preamble, for the existing expression "the VIT University, Jaipur", the expression "the Vivekananda Global University, Jaipur" shall be substituted. Section 1 - In sub-section (1), for the existing expression "the VIT University, Jaipur Act", the expression "the Vivekananda Global University, Jaipur Act" shall be substituted. Section 2 - For clause (za), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:- "(za) "University" means the Vivekananda Global University, Jaipur.". Section 3 - ln sub-section (1), for the existing expression "the VIT University, Jaipur", the expression "the Vivekananda Global University, Jaipur" shall be substituted. 
