Brij University, Bharatpur (Change of Name) Act, 2014_Section Preamble--> State(s): Rajasthan An Act to change the name of the Brij University, Bharatpur and to make certain amendments in the Brij University, Bharatpur Act, 2012. Be it enacted by the Rajasthan State Legislature in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of India, as follows:-
Brij University, Bharatpur (Change of Name) Act, 2014_Section 1--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) This Act may be called the Brij University, Bharatpur (Change of Name) Act, 2014. (2) It shall come into force at once.
Brij University, Bharatpur (Change of Name) Act, 2014_Section 2--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) The name of the Brij University, Bharatpur incorporated under the Brij University, Bharatpur Act, 2012 (Act No. 28 of 2012), hereinafter referred to as the principal Act, shall, as from the date of commencement of this Act, be the Maharaja Surajmal Brij University, Bharatpur. (2) Any reference to the Brij University, Bharatpur in any law for the time being in force or in any indenture, instrument or other documents shall be read and construed as a reference to that University under its name as altered by this Act. (3) Nothing in this Act shall affect the continuity of the corporate status of the said University.
Brij University, Bharatpur (Change of Name) Act, 2014_Section 3--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) As from the date of commencement of this Act, the principal Act shall stand amended to the extent and in the manner specified in the Schedule to this Act. (2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall be without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of section 2.
Brij University, Bharatpur (Change of Name) Act, 2014_Section 4--> State(s): Rajasthan The principal Act may be cited as the Maharaja Surajmal Brij University, Bharatpur Act, 2012.
Brij University, Bharatpur (Change of Name) Act, 2014_Section Sch.--> State(s): Rajasthan (See section 3) Long Title.- In long title, for the existing expression "Brij University at Bharatpur", the expression "Maharaja Surajmal Brij University at Bharatpur" shall be substituted. Section 1.- In sub-section (1), for the existing expression "the Brij University, Bharatpur", the expression "the Maharaja Surajmal Brij University, Bharatpur" shall be substituted. Section 2.- For the existing clause (o), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:- "(o) "University" means the Maharaja Surajmal Brij University, Bharatpur incorporated under section 3;". Section 3.- In sub-section (1), for the existing expression "the Brij University, Bharatpur", the expression "the Maharaja Surajmal Brij University, Bharatpur" shall be substituted. Principal Secretary to the Government. 
