Rajasthan Cash Jagirs Abolition Act, 1958_Section Preamble--> State(s): Rajasthan An Act to provide for the abolition of certain classes of cash jaguars in the State of Rajasthan. Be it enacted by the Rajasthan State Legislature in the Ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows :-
Rajasthan Cash Jagirs Abolition Act, 1958_Section 1--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) This Act may be called the Rajasthan Cash Jagirs Abolition Act, 1958.1 (2) It extends to the whole of the State of Rajasthan. Received the assent of the President on the 13th day of July, 1958.
Rajasthan Cash Jagirs Abolition Act, 1958_Section 2--> State(s): Rajasthan In this Act, unless the subject or context otherwise requires,- (a) "Cash jagir to which this Act applies" means any grant of money by way of jagir or otherwise, made or recognised to have been made by the Government in any part of the State or by the Ruler of a covenanting State without any consideration or in lieu of jagir resumed or abolished otherwise than under the Rajasthan Land Reforms and Resumption of Jagirs Act, 1952 (Rajasthan Act VI of 1952) or under the Ajmer Abolition of Intermediaries and Land Reforms Act, 1955 (Ajmer Act III of 1955) or under the Madhya Bharat Zamindari Abolition Act, Samvat 2008 (Madhya Bharat Act 13 of, 1951) or under the Madhya Bharat Abolition of Jagirs Act, Samvat 2008 (Madhya Bharat Act 28 of 1951) or under the Bombay Merged Territories and Areas (Jagirs Abolition) Act, 1953 (Bombay Act XXXIX of 1954), and includes such grants made and enjoyed under any of the denominations or appellations specified in the First Schedule; and (b) "State" or "State of Rajasthan" means the new State of Rajasthan as formed by Sec. 10 of the States Re-organisation Act, 1956 (Central Act 37 of 1956).
Rajasthan Cash Jagirs Abolition Act, 1958_Section 3--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any law, sanad, order, custom or usage in force in any part of the State, all payments of money on account of cash jagirs to which this Act applies, that were being made or enforced at the commencement of this Act, shall be discontinued on and from the 1st day of April, 1958 and all such cash jagirs shall stand abolished as from that day. (2) Notwithstanding such discontinuance and abolition the State Government shall continue to make payments by way of compensation in accordance with the scale laid down in the Second Schedule, and the provisions of the Rajasthan Pensions Act, 1958, shall apply to such payments.
Rajasthan Cash Jagirs Abolition Act, 1958_Section 4--> State(s): Rajasthan Where any cash jagir to which this Act applies is or has been subject to the rendering of any service, the liability of the holder for rendering such service shall cease and determine as from the 1st day of April, 1958.
Rajasthan Cash Jagirs Abolition Act, 1958_Section 5--> State(s): Rajasthan The State Government may, from time to time, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Rajasthan Cash Jagirs Abolition Act, 1958_Section 6--> State(s): Rajasthan Nothing in this Act or in the rules made there under shall affect- (1) grants of money made or recognised to have been made by the Government in any part of the State or by the Ruler of a covenanting State for charitable or religious purposes or partly for charitable and partly for religious purposes, or (2) such other grants of money as the State Government may, from time to time, by notification in the official Gazette, declare to be exempt from the provisions of this Act, and the provisions of the Rajasthan Pensions Act, 1958, shall apply to such exempted grants of money.
Rajasthan Cash Jagirs Abolition Act, 1958_Section 7--> State(s): Rajasthan If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act or the rules made there under, the State Government may, as occasion may require, make such orders or give such directions as may appear to it to be necessary for the purposes of removing the difficulty.
Rajasthan Cash Jagirs Abolition Act, 1958_Section Sch.--> State(s): Rajasthan [See Sec. 2 (a)] Denominations of Grants of Money 1. Jagir Naqdi. 2. Aloofa. 3. Khangi. 4. Khan-paan. 5. Rozeena. 6. Tankha. 7. Khidmat. 8. Chakrana. 9. Rusum to chowdhris and kanungo. 10. Any other class of grant of money.
Rajasthan Cash Jagirs Abolition Act, 1958_Section Sch.--> State(s): Rajasthan [See sub-sec. (2) of Sec. 3] Scale of Compensatory Payment A person in respect of a cash jagir to which this Act applies will be paid monthly by way of compensation a sum of money equal to the monthly rate of the cash jagir being paid to him, whether monthly or otherwise, immediately before the 1st day of April, 1958 hereinafter referred to as the said day,- (a) if such monthly rate does not exceed fifty rupees, for a period of fifteen years as from the said day; (b) if such monthly rate exceeds fifty rupees but does not exceed two hundred and fifty rupees, for a period of twelve years as from the said day; and (c) if such monthly rate exceeds two hundred and fifty rupees for a period of ten years as from the said day. 
