Rajasthan Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section Preamble--> State(s): Delhi, Rajasthan An Act further to amend the Rajasthan Co-operative Societies Act, 2001. Be it enacted by the Rajasthan State Legislature in the Sixty-fourth Year of the Republic of India, as follows:-
Rajasthan Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 1--> State(s): Delhi, Rajasthan (1) This Act may be called the Rajasthan Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Act, 2013.1 (2) It shall come into force at once Received the assent of the Governor on the 22th day of April 2013
Rajasthan Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 2--> State(s): Delhi, Rajasthan In section 2 of the Rajasthan Co-operative Societies Act, 2001 (Act No. 16 of 2002), hereinafter in this Act referred to as the principal Act, after the existing clause (pa) and before the existing clause (q), the following new clause shall be inserted, namely:- "(pb) "office bearer' means a Chairperson or Vice-Chairperson of a co-operative society and includes any other person to be elected by the committee of a co-operative society;
Rajasthan Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 3--> State(s): Delhi, Rajasthan In sub- section (2) of section 16 of the principal Act, the existing expression if any,", appearing after the existing expression "provisions of the bye-laws" and before the existing expression "regarding minimum essential utilisation", shall be deleted.
Rajasthan Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 4--> State(s): Delhi, Rajasthan In section 18 of the principal Act, for the existing expression " unless he has made such payments to the society in respect of membership or", the expression "unless he has made payments in respect of all dues to the society including the payment in respect of membership or availed such minimum level of services or" shall be substituted.
Rajasthan Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 5--> State(s): Delhi, Rajasthan In clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 20 of the principal Act, after the existing expression "Vice-Chairperson" and before the existing expression "shall", the expression "or an Administrator appointed under section 30" shall be inserted.
Rajasthan Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 6--> State(s): Delhi, Rajasthan In section 21 of the principal Act. for the existing punctuation mark ".", appearing at the end, the punctuation mark ":" shall be substituted and thereafter the following new proviso shall be added, namely:- "Provided that an individual member of Urban Co-operative Bank shall hold shares only upto a maximum of the one twentieth to the total share capital of the society.".
Rajasthan Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 7--> State(s): Delhi, Rajasthan In sub-section (1) of section 25 of the principal Act, after the existing expression "society shall" and before the existing expression "call in the manner prescribed", the expression ",within a period of six months of close of the financial year, " shall be inserted.
Rajasthan Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 8--> State(s): Delhi, Rajasthan For the existing section 27 of the principal Act, the following shall be substituted, namely:- "27. Appointment of Committee - (1) The general body of a co-operative society shall entrust the management of the affairs of the society to a committee constituted in accordance with the bye-laws: Provided that in the case of a society registered after the commencement of this Act, the persons who have signed the application to register the society may appoint a committee to conduct the affairs of the society for the period of three months from the date of the registration, but the committee appointed under this proviso shall cease to function upon the constitution of a new committee which shall be constituted in accordance with the bye-laws within the said period of three months. (2) The committee shall have such number of members as prescribed in the bye-laws: Provided that the maximum number of the members of the committee shall not exceed twenty one: Provided further that twelve members of the committee shall be elected by the general body of the society: Provided also that one seat for the Scheduled Castes, one seat for the Scheduled Tribes and two seats for women shall be reserved in the committee of a co-operative society consisting of individuals as members and having members from such class or category of persons. (3) The committee of a co-operative society shall co-opt such number of persons having experience in field of banking, management, finance or specialization in any other field relating to the objects and activities undertaken by the co-operative society as members of the committee as may be specified in the bye-laws: Provided that the number of such co-opted members shall not exceed two in addition to twenty one members of the committee specified in the first proviso of sub-section (2): Provided further that the functional directors of a co-operative society shall also be the members of the committee and such members shall be excluded for the purpose of counting the total number of members of the committee specified in the first proviso. (4) The term of office of the elected members of the committee and its office bearers shall be five years from the date of election and the term of office bearers shall be co-terminus with the term of the committee: Provided that the committee may fill a casual vacancy on the committee by nomination out of the same class of members in respect of which the casual vacancy has arisen, if the term of office of the committee is less than half of its original term: Provided further that if a causal vacancy on the committee has arisen and the term of office of the committee is more than half of its original term, such vacancy shall be filled up by election, nomination or co- option, as the case may be, and the member so elected, nominated or co-opted, as the case may be, shall hold the office for the remainder of the term. (5) Each member of the committee, including the members nominated under section 29 or co-opted under sub-section (3), shall be entitled to cast one vote: Provided that members nominated under section 29 or co-opted under sub-section (3), shall not have any right to vote in any election of the co-operative society in their capacity as such members or to be eligible to be elected as office bearers of the committee: Provided further that where the member nominated by the State Government has any dissent with the resolution passed by the committee, he shall inform the Registrar about such dissent within a week.".
Rajasthan Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 9--> State(s): Delhi, Rajasthan For the existing section 28 of the principal Act, the following shall be substituted, namely:- "28. Disqualification of membership etc. of committees - (1) No person shall, at the same time, be a Chairperson of more than one apex society, or more than one central society. (2) If a person, on the date of his election as a Chairperson of an apex or a central society as aforesaid, is already a Chairperson of another apex or central society, his later election shall be deemed to be void on the expiry of a period of fourteen days from the above election, unless he resigns from the chairpersonship of one of the above two apex or two central societies, as the case may be, within such period. (3) No person shall be eligible for being elected, co- opted or nominated as a member of a committee or for continuing as member on the committee if he is in default to the society or to any other society, in respect of any loan or loans taken by him for such period as is specified in the bye-laws of the society concerned or in any case for a period exceeding three months: Provided that this disqualification shall not apply on a member society. (4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3), no person shall be eligible for being elected, co- opted or nominated, or for continuing as a member of the committee of a Central Co-operative Bank or the Apex Co-operative Bank, if he- (i) represents a society other than a primary agricultural credit society and such society is in default to such bank, in respect of any loan or loans taken by it for a period exceeding ninety days; (ii) is a person who is defaulter of a primary agricultural credit society or is a representative of a defaulting primary agricultural credit society for a period exceeding one year unless the default is cleared ; and (iii) is a person, who represents a society whose committee is superseded or has ceased to be a member of the committee of his own society. (5) No money lender as defined in the Rajasthan Money Lenders Act, 1963 (Act No. 1 of 1964) shall be eligible for being elected or co-opted as an officer of a service co-operative society, as classified under the rules, and where an officer of such society as aforesaid starts money lending business, he shall, thereupon, cease to be an officer of such society. (6) No member of a committee, who has been removed under section 30, shall be eligible for election, co- option or nomination as a member of any committee for a period of five years from the date of such removal: Provided that a member of the committee replaced by an Administrator on the ground mentioned in clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 30, shall not be deemed disqualified under this sub-section. (7) No person against whom an order under section 57 has been passed, such order not having been set aside, shall be eligible for election, co-option or nomination as a member of a committee until the expiry of a period of five years from the date he repays or restores the money or other property or part thereof with interest or pay contribution and cost or compensation in satisfaction of such order. (8) No person- (i) against whom a competent court has taken cognizance for an offence punishable under section 120B, 405, 406, 407, 408, 409, 415, 416, 419, 420, 421, 422, 423, 424, 447, 463, 464, 465, 466, 467, 468, 469, 470, 471, 472, 473, 474, 475, 476 or 477A of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (Central Act No. 45 of 1860) and is under trial shall be eligible to be elected, co-opted or nominated or to continue as a member of the committee of a society; or (ii) who has been convicted of any offence by a competent court and sentenced to imprisonment for three months or more, such sentence not having been subsequently reversed or remitted or the offender pardoned, shall be eligible to be elected, co-opted or nominated or to continue as a member of the committee of a society for a period of five years from the date of such conviction. (9) No person shall remain both a Chairperson of a committee and a member of the Union Council of Ministers or the State Council of Ministers or the Pramukh of a Zila Parishad or the Pradhan of a Panchayat Samiti and, if already a member of the Union Council of Ministers or the State Council of Ministers or Pramukh of a Zila Parishad or Pradhan of a Panchayat Samiti, he shall, at the expiration of a period of fourteen days from the date he becomes a Chairperson of such committee, cease to be such Chairperson of such committee unless, before such expiration, he resigns his seat in the Union Council of Ministers or the State Council of Ministers or the office he holds in the Zila Parishad or the Panchayat Samiti, as the case may be : Provided that a person who is already a Chairperson of a committee is elected as a member of the Union Council of Ministers or the State Council of Ministers or Pramukh of a Zila Parishad or Pradhan of a Panchayat Samiti, then at the expiration of fourteen days from the date of being elected as a member of the Union Council of Ministers or the State Council of Ministers or Pramukh of a Zila Parishad or Pradhan of a Panchayat Samiti, as the case may be, he shall cease to be such Chairperson of the committee unless he has previously resigned his seat in the Union Council of Ministers or the State Council of Ministers or the office he holds in the Zila Parishad or the Panchayat Samiti, as the case may be : Provided further that he may become member of the committee or a Director. (10) No person shall be eligible for election, co- option or nomination as a member of the committee if he has more than two children: Provided that a person having more than two children shall not be disqualified under this sub-section for so long as the number of children he had on 10-07-1995 docs not increase. Explanation - For the purpose of this sub-section, where the couple has only one child from the earlier delivery or deliveries on 10-07-1995 and thereafter, any number of children born out of a single subsequent delivery shall be deemed to be one entity. (11) No member of a committee, which has failed to provide the required information or assistance to the State Co-operative Election, Authority under Chapter V shall be eligible for election, co-option or nomination as a member of the committee for a period of five years from the date of such failure. (12) Any question as to whether a member of the committee has become subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned under this section or the rules shall be decided by the Election Officer during the process of election and by the Registrar at all other times.".
Rajasthan Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 10--> State(s): Delhi, Rajasthan For the existing section 30 of the principal Act, the following shall be substituted, namely:- "30. Removal of Committee or Member thereof - (1) Where- (a) the committee of a co-operative society (i) persistently makes default; or (ii) is negligent in the performance of its duties imposed on it or him by this Act or the rules or the bye-laws ; or (iii) commits any act prejudicial to the interest of the society or its members; or (b) there is stalemate in the constitution or functions of the committee; or (c) the term of the existing committee has expired and the State Co-operative Election Authority has failed to conduct elections for a new committee in accordance with the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder, the Zonal Registrar, in case of primary society, the Registrar, Co-operative Societies. Rajasthan, in case of a central society and the State Government in case of an apex society may, after giving the committee a reasonable opportunity of being heard, by order in writing, remove the committee and appoint a Government servant as an Administrator to manage the affairs of the society for a period not exceeding six months: Provided that the committee of a society shall not be superseded where there is no Government shareholding or loan or financial assistance or any guarantee by the Government: Provided further that in case of a co-operative society carrying on the business of banking, the provisions of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (Central Act No. 10 of 1949) shall also apply: Provided also that in ease of a co-operative society carrying on the business of banking, the provisions of this clause shall have effect as if for the words "six months", the words "one year" had been substituted. (2) If any member of the committee persistently makes default or is negligent in the performance of his duties imposed by this Act or the rules or the bye-laws made thereunder or commits any act prejudicial to the interest of the society or its members, the Zonal Registrar, in case of primary society, the Registrar, Co-operative Societies. Rajasthan, in case of a central society and the State Government in case of an apex society may, after giving a reasonable opportunity of being heard, remove such member by order in writing. (3) The Administrator appointed under sub-section (1) shall,- (a) arrange for conduct of elections within the period specified in that sub-section and hand over the management to the elected committee; and (b) till the time the new committee is elected, subject to the control of the Registrar and to such instructions as he may from time to time give, have powers to perform all or any of the functions of the elected committee and take all such actions as may be required in the interest of the society.".
Rajasthan Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 11--> State(s): Delhi, Rajasthan For the existing section 32 of the principal Act. the following shall be substituted namely:- "32. Election of Co-operative Society - The Election of a committee shall be conducted before the expiry of the term of the committee so as to ensure that the newly elected members of the committee assume office immediately on the expiry of term of the office of members of the outgoing committee.
Rajasthan Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 12--> State(s): Delhi, Rajasthan For the existing section 33 of the principal Act, the following shall he substituted, namely: - "33. State Co-operative Election Authority and its function - (1) The State Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint an officer of the Stale Government, as the State Co-operative Election Authority, hereinafter in this Chapter referred to as the Authority, in such manner, as may be prescribed, and may appoint such other officers and staff to assist such Authority, as it may deem fit. (2) The terms and conditions of the service of the Authority and other officers and staff appointed under sub-section (1) shall be such as may he prescribed. (3) The superintendence, direction and control of the preparation of electoral rolls for, and the conduct of all elections to a co-operative society shall vest in the Authority. (4) The State Government may prescribe procedure and guidelines for conduct of elections to the co-operative societies. (5) For the purpose of this Chapter, the Zonal Registrars. Co-operative Societies posted at zone level and Unit officer posted at the unit level shall act as ex-officio Zonal Returning Officer and Unit Returning Officer respectively and shall be answerable to the Authority for discharging the duties entrusted to them by the Authority. (6) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (4) of section 27, the Authority shall conduct elections for filling in a casual vacancy occurring in the committee of a society for the remainder of the term of the committee, within six months of the occurrence of such vacancy.
Rajasthan Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 13--> State(s): Delhi, Rajasthan For the existing section 34 of the principal Act, the following shall be substituted, namely:- "34. Prelude to the elections - (1) The Chief Executive Officer of every co-operative society shall send a written information in such manner, as may be prescribed, to the Authority to conduct election of its committee and its office bearers, six months before the expiry of the term of the existing committee. The Chief Executive Officer shall also send written information regarding a casual vacancy in the committee immediately after occurrence of such vacancy. (2) It shall be the duty of the committee of a society to ensure that all the information, books and records, which the Authority may require for the purpose of election, are updated and made available in time to the Authority or a person authorized by it for the purpose. (3) The committee of the society shall also ensure that the society provides all the assistance to the Authority, as may be required by it for conduct of the election. (4) The process of election of co-operative society, once started shall not be stopped or postponed for any reason, save for a natural calamity or break down of law and order.".
Rajasthan Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 14--> State(s): Delhi, Rajasthan For the existing section 54 of the principal Act, the following shall be substituted, namely:- "54. Accounts and Audit - (1) Every society shall prepare and maintain its accounts of each financial year in the prescribed form and manner. (2) Every society shall cause its accounts to be audited by an auditor or auditing firm appointed by the general body of the society from amongst the panel approved under sub-section (4): Provided that no auditor or auditing firm shall be appointed for the audit of the accounts of the society for more than two years in continuation. (3) The accounts of every society shall be audited within six months of the close of the financial year to which such accounts relate. (4) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the Registrar shall prepare, approve and notify a panel, in the prescribed manner, of eligible auditors and auditing firms. (5) Following shall be the minimum qualification and experience for auditors and auditing firms that shall be eligible for auditing accounts of the societies, namely:- (a) in case of an auditor,- (i) he must be a Chartered Accountant as defined in the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949 (Central Act No. 38 of 1949) and should have at least three years post-qualification experience of auditing accounts; or (ii) he must be a person in the service of the Co-operative Department of the Government of Rajasthan, appointed, or authorised, to conduct audit of the co-operative societies and must have diploma in co-operative audit awarded by the National Council for Cooperative Training, New Delhi; and (b) in case of an auditing firm, it must be a firm of Chartered Accountants as defined in the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949 (Central Act No. 38 of 1949) and should have at least three years experience of auditing accounts. (6) Cost of the audit shall be decided and paid by the co-operative society concerned: Provided that the fee of the auditors referred to in sub-clause (ii) of clause (a) of sub-section (5) shall be prescribed by the State Government. (7) The society shall render, to the auditor or as the case may be, auditing firm, access to all the books, accounts, documents, papers, securities, cash and other properties belonging to the society. (8) Every person, who is or has at any time been, an officer or an employee or an agent of the society and every member and past member of the society shall furnish such information in regard to the transactions and working of the society as the auditor or. as the case may be. auditing firm may require. (9) The auditor or, as the case may be. auditing firm shall have the right to receive all notices, and every communication relating to the annual general meeting of the society and to attend such meeting and to be heard thereat. (10) The auditor or as the case may be. auditing firm shall prepare audit report in the Proforma prescribed by the Registrar and submit the audit report to the society. (11) The auditor or as the case may be. auditing firm auditing the accounts of a short term co-operative credit structure society shall endorse a copy of the audit report to the Reserve Bank of India, the National Bank and the Registrar. (12) The Registrar shall ensure conduct of special audit of the Rajasthan State Cooperative Bank or a Central Cooperative Bank, if requested by the Reserve Bank of India, in the manner and form stipulated by the Reserve Bank of India and shall furnish the report to the Reserve Bank of India within the time stipulated. (13) The society shall send a copy of the audit report along with compliance thereof after consideration and approval of the same by the General Body of the society to the Registrar and to its affiliating society, if any. (14) The Registrar shall submit to the State Government the audit report of the accounts of the Apex Cooperative Society and the State Government shall cause such report to be laid before the State Legislature. (15) If the State Legislature resolves to make any direction or recommendation on the audit report laid before it. the society shall, as soon as possible, comply with the directions or. as the case may be. recommendations.".
Rajasthan Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 15--> State(s): Delhi, Rajasthan In clause (iii) of section 62 of the principal Act, for the existing expression "five years", the expression "one year" shall be substituted.
Rajasthan Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 16--> State(s): Delhi, Rajasthan In section 67 of the principal Act- (i) in clause (a), for the existing expression "loans other than short term and medium term loans", the expression "long term loans" shall be substituted; (ii) the existing clause (b) shall be renumbered as clause (c) and before clause (c), so renumbered, the following shall be substituted, namely:- "(b) Land Development Banks advancing short term and medium term loans under the special schemes approved by the National Bank or for purposes specially approved by the State Government for this purpose on such terms and conditions, as the State Government may decide:"; and (iii) in clause (ii) of the Explanation, the existing expression "and", appearing at the end. shall be deleted and thereafter, the following new clause shall be inserted, namely:- "(ii-A) "long term loan" means a loan which is neither a short term nor a medium term loan: and".
Rajasthan Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 17--> State(s): Delhi, Rajasthan For the existing section 74 of the principal Act, the following shall be substituted, namely:- "74. Mode of dealing with applications for loan - When an application for a loan is made for any of the purposes mentioned in section 67, the Land Development Bank shall consider such application after the due inquiry and in such manner as may be prescribed.".
Rajasthan Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 18--> State(s): Delhi, Rajasthan The existing clause (d) of sub-section (2) of section 104 of the principal Act shall be deleted.
Rajasthan Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 19--> State(s): Delhi, Rajasthan In clause (a) of sub-section (10) of section 105 of the principal Act. for the existing expression "sub-section (5) of section 28", the expression "sub-section (12) of section 28" shall be substituted.
Rajasthan Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 20--> State(s): Delhi, Rajasthan In section 109 of the principal Act- (i) in sub-section (1)- (a) in clause (a), for the existing expression "sub- section (2)", the expression "sub-section (3)" shall be substituted: (b) in clause (c), for the existing expression "make deductions", the expression "make deductions pay the amount so deducted" shall be substituted: (c) in clause (h), for the existing expression "30, 31, 54, 55, 60 or 63", the expression "30, 31, 55, 60, 63 or 122-A or to the auditor or auditing firm appointed under section 54" shall be substituted: (d) for the existing clause (r) the following shall be substituted, namely:- "(r) any person wilfully or without any reasonable excuse disobeys any summons, requisitions or lawful written order issued under the provisions of this Act; or"; and (e) after clause (r), so amended, the following new clause shall be added, namely:- "(s) any person, who before, during or after the elections of members of the committee or its office bearers, adopts any corrupt practice."; and (ii) in sub-section (2)- (a) for the existing clause (r). the following shall be substituted, namely:- "(r) if it is an offence under clause (r) of sub-section (1), with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees. or with both ; and (b) after clause (r), so amended, the following new clause shall be added, namely:- "(s) if it is an offence under clause (s) of sub-section (1), with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees, or with both
Rajasthan Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 21--> State(s): Delhi, Rajasthan After the existing section 122 and before the existing section 123 of the principal Act, the following new section shall be inserted, namely:- "122-A. Filing of returns - Every society shall, within six months of the close of every financial year, file the following returns to the Registrar, namely:- (a) annual report of its activities; (b) its audited statements of accounts; (c) plan for surplus disposal, as approved by the general body of the society: (d) list of amendments to the bye-laws of the co-operative society, if any; (e) declaration regarding date of holding of its general body meeting and conduct of elections, when due; and (f) such other information, as the Registrar may require, from time to time."
Rajasthan Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 22--> State(s): Delhi, Rajasthan After the existing sub-paragraph (d) and before the existing sub-paragraph (e) of paragraph (1) of the Schedule-B of the principal Act, the following sub-paragraph shall be inserted, namely:- "(da) the norms regarding minimum essential utilisation of the services of the society or regarding minimum essential attendance of the meetings of the society or regarding other dealings with the society, which shall be fulfilled by a member; Prakash Gupta Principal Secretary to the Government. 
