Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar Law University, Jaipur Act, 2012_Section Preamble--> State(s): Rajasthan An Act to establish and incorporate Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar Law University at Jaipur in the State of Rajasthan and to provide for the matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. Be it enacted by the Rajasthan State Legislature in the Sixty-third Year of the Republic of India, as follows:-
Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar Law University, Jaipur Act, 2012_Section 1--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) This Act may be called the Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar Law University, Jaipur Act, 2012. (2) It extends to the whole of the State of Rajasthan. (3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on and from 23rd August, 2012.
Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar Law University, Jaipur Act, 2012_Section 2--> State(s): Rajasthan In this Act, unless the subject or context otherwise requires,- (a) "Academic Council" means the Academic Council of the University as constituted under section 21; (b) "affiliated college" means an educational institution admitted to the privileges of the University; (c) "autonomous college" means an educational institution declared as such under the provisions of this Act; (d) "Board" means the Board of Management of the University constituted under section 19; (e) "Comptroller" means the Finance officer of the University appointed under section 14; (f) "constituent college" means a college maintained by the University; (g) "Faculty" means a Faculty of the University; (h) "Finance Committee" means the Finance Committee of the University constituted under section 25; (i) "prescribed" means prescribed by the Statutes, Ordinances or Regulations; (j) "Principal" means the Chief Executive Officer of a college or any person duly appointed to act as such; (k) "Registrar" means the Registrar of the University appointed under section 13; (l) "Statutes", "Ordinances" and "Regulations" mean the Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations of the University made under sections 42, 44 and 46 respectively; (m) "student of the University" means a person enrolled in the University for taking a course of study for a degree, diploma or other academic distinction duly instituted; (n) "teacher" means a person appointed or recognized by the University for the purpose of imparting instruction or conducting and guiding research and includes a person who may be declared by the Statutes to be a teacher; (o) "University" means the Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar Law University, Jaipur incorporated under section 3; (p) "University Department" means a Department maintained by the University.
Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar Law University, Jaipur Act, 2012_Section 3--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) The Chancellor, the first Vice-Chancellor, the first members of the Board of Management and the Academic Council of the University and all persons who may hereafter become such officers or members so long as they continue to hold such office or membership shall constitute a body corporate by the name of "the Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar Law University, Jaipur" and shall have perpetual succession and a Common Seal and may by that name sue and be sued. (2) The University shall be competent to acquire and hold property, both movable and immovable, to lease, sell or otherwise transfer or dispose of any movable or immovable property, which may vest in or be acquired by it for the purposes of the University, and to contract and do all other things necessary for the purposes of this Act: Provided that no such lease, sale, transfer or disposal of such property shall be made without the prior approval of the State Government. (3) The headquarters of the University shall be at Jaipur which shall be the headquarters of the Vice-Chancellor. (4) In all suits and other legal proceedings by or against the University, the pleadings shall be signed and verified by the Registrar and all processes in such suits and proceedings shall be issued to and served on the Registrar.
Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar Law University, Jaipur Act, 2012_Section 4--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, the jurisdiction of the University shall extend to whole of the State of Rajasthan and all Law colleges, except constituent colleges of other Universities, shall be affiliated to the Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar Law University, Jaipur in accordance with the Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations made under this Act. (2) The State Government may, by order in writing- (a) require any institute, institution or college within the territorial limits of the University to terminate, with effect from such date as may be specified in the order, its association with, or its admission to the privileges of any other University incorporated by law to such extent as may be considered necessary and proper, or (b) exclude, to such extent as may be considered necessary and proper, from association with, or from admission to the privileges of the University constituted by this Act any institute, institution or college specified in the order which, in the opinion of the State Government, is required to be self governing or to be associated with or admitted to the privileges of, any other University or body. (3) The State Government may, in consultation with the University, by notification published in the Official Gazette, enumerate any Government College situated in the jurisdiction of the University to be a constituent college of the University. All the movable and immovable properties of such college shall then vest in the University and the officers, teachers and employees of such College, after being found suitable through screening and on fulfilling such terms and conditions as may be laid down in the notification, shall be deemed to be the officers, teachers or, as the case may be, employees of the University.
Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar Law University, Jaipur Act, 2012_Section 5--> State(s): Rajasthan The University shall be deemed to have been established and incorporated for the purpose, among others, of- (i) making provision for imparting legal education in different branches of learning; (ii) furthering the prosecution of research in all branches of legal education.
Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar Law University, Jaipur Act, 2012_Section 6--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) The University shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations, be open to all persons. (2) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall require the University- (a) to admit to any course of study any person who does not possess the prescribed academic qualification or standard; or (b) to retain on the rolls of the University any student whose academic record is below the minimum standard required for the award of a degree, diploma or other academic distinction; or (c) to admit any person or retain any student whose conduct is prejudicial to the interests or discipline of the University or the rights and privileges of other students and employees; or (d) to admit to any course of study students larger in number than those prescribed. (3) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), reservation of seats in admission for the students belonging to the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Backward Classes and women students shall be made in accordance with the provisions of any law for the time being in force or in accordance with the policy of the State Government.
Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar Law University, Jaipur Act, 2012_Section 7--> State(s): Rajasthan The University shall have the following powers and functions, namely:- (a) to provide for instruction in various branches of legal learning as the University may deem fit; (b) to make provision for research and advancement of knowledge and dissemination of the findings of research and knowledge; (c) to institute and confer degrees, diplomas and other academic distinction; (d) to confer honorary degrees or other distinctions; (e) to admit colleges, institutions and institutes not maintained by the University, to the privileges of the University, and to withdraw all or any of these privileges; (f) to confer autonomous status on a college, institution or department, as the case may be, subject to such conditions as may be laid down in this Act or as may be prescribed by the Statutes and to withdraw the autonomy; (g) to cooperate with other University and authorities in such manner and for such purpose as the University may determine; (h) to institute teaching, research and other posts required by the University and to make appointments thereto; (i) to create administrative, ministerial and other necessary posts and make appointments thereto; (j) to institute and award fellowships (including travelling fellowships), scholarships and prizes; (k) to institute and maintain residential accommodation for the students of the University; (l) to demand and receive such fees and other charges as may be prescribed; (m) to supervise and control the residential accommodation for students and to regulate the discipline of the students of the University and to make arrangements for promoting their health and welfare; and (n) to do all such acts and things, whether incidental to the powers aforesaid or not, as may be requisite in order to further the objects of the University.
Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar Law University, Jaipur Act, 2012_Section 8--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) The Governor of the State of Rajasthan shall, by virtue of his or her office, be the Chancellor of the University. (2) The Chancellor shall be the Head of the University and shall, when present, preside at the convocations thereof and confer degrees, diplomas or other academic distinctions upon persons entitled to receive them. (3) The Chancellor may of his or her own motion or on application call for and examine the record of any officer or authority of the University in respect of any proceeding to satisfy himself or herself as to the regularity of such proceeding or the correctness, legality or propriety of any decision taken or order made therein; and if in any case, it appears to the Chancellor that any such decision or order should be modified, annulled, reversed or remitted for reconsideration, he or she may pass orders accordingly: Provided that every application to the Chancellor for the exercise of the powers under this section shall be preferred within three months from the date on which the proceeding, decision or order to which the application relates was communicated to the applicant: Provided further that no order prejudicial to any person shall be passed unless such person has been given an opportunity of making his representation. (4) The Chancellor shall exercise such other powers and perform such other functions as may be conferred on or assigned to him or her by or under this Act.
Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar Law University, Jaipur Act, 2012_Section 9--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) The Chancellor shall have the right to cause an inspection, to be made by such person or persons, as he or she may direct- (a) of the University, its buildings, laboratories, libraries, museums, workshops and equipments; or (b) of any college, institution or hostel maintained by the University; or (c) of the teaching and other work conducted or done by the University; or (d) of the conduct of any examination held by the University. (2) The Chancellor shall also have the right to cause an inquiry to be made by such person or persons as he or she may direct in respect of any matter connected with the University. (3) The Chancellor shall, in every case, give notice to the University of his or her intention to cause an inspection or inquiry to be made and the University shall be entitled to be represented at such inspection or inquiry. (4) The Chancellor shall communicate to the University his or her views with reference to the result of such inspection or inquiry and may, after ascertaining the opinion of the University thereon, advise the University upon the action to be taken and fix a time limit for taking such action. (5) The University shall, within the time limit so fixed, report to the Chancellor the action taken or proposed to be taken on the advice tendered by the Chancellor. (6) If the University does not take action within the time limit fixed, or if the action taken by the University is, in the opinion of the Chancellor, not satisfactory, the Chancellor may, after considering any explanation offered or representation made by the University, issue such direction as he or she may deem fit and the University shall comply with such direction. (7) If the University does not comply with such direction issued as per sub-section (6) within such time as may be fixed in that behalf by the Chancellor, the Chancellor shall at his or her discretion have power to appoint any person or body to implement such direction and make such order as may be necessary for the expenses thereof.
Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar Law University, Jaipur Act, 2012_Section 10--> State(s): Rajasthan The following shall be the officers and authorities of the University, namely:- (a) Officers of the University- (i) the Vice-Chancellor; (ii) the Registrar; (iii) the Comptroller; (iv) the Estate Officer; (v) the Dean of Student Welfare; (vi) the Deans of Faculties; and (vii) such other persons in the service of the University as may be declared by the Statutes to be the officers of the University. (b) Authorities of the University- (i) the Board of Management; (ii) the Academic Council; (iii) the Faculties; (iv) the Board of Studies; (v) the Finance Committee; and (vi) such other authorities as may be declared by the Statutes to be the authorities of the University.
Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar Law University, Jaipur Act, 2012_Section 11--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) The Vice-Chancellor shall be a whole time paid officer of the University and shall be appointed by the Chancellor in consultation with the State Government upon recommendation of a Selection Committee consisting of- (a) one person nominated by the Board not connected with the University or any college thereof; (b) one person nominated by the Chairman, University Grants Commission; (c) one person nominated by the Chancellor; and (d) one person nominatedbythe State Government, and the Chancellor shall appoint one of these persons to be the Chairman of the Committee. (2) The term of the office of the Vice-Chancellor shall be three years from the date on which he or she enters upon his or her office or until he or she attains the age of seventy years, whichever is earlier: Provided that the same person shall be eligible for reappointment for a second term. (3) The Vice-Chancellor shall receive such pay and allowances as may be determined by the State Government. In addition to ti, he or she shall be entitled to free furnished residence maintained by the University and such other perquisites as may be prescribed. (4) When a permanent vacancy in the office of the Vice-Chancellor occurs by reason of his or her death, resignation, removal or the expiry of his or her term of office, it shall be filled by the Chancellor in accordance with sub-section (1) and for so long as it is not so filled, stop-gap arrangement shall be made by him or her under and in accordance with sub-section (5). (5) When a temporary vacancy in the office of the Vice-Chancellor occurs by reason of leave, suspension or otherwise or when a stop-gap arrangement is necessary under sub-section (4), the Registrar shall forthwith report the matter to the Chancellor who shall make, on the advice of the State Government, arrangement for the carrying on of the function of the office of the Vice-Chancellor. (6) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) to sub-section (5), the first Vice-Chancellor of the University shall be appointed by the Chancellor on the advice of the State Government for a period not exceeding three years on such terms and conditions as the State Government may determine. (7) The Vice-Chancellor may at any time relinquish office by submitting, not less than sixty days in advance of the date on which he wishes to be relieved, his or her resignation to the Chancellor. (8) Such resignation shall take effect from the date determined by the Chancellor and conveyed to the Vice-Chancellor.
Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar Law University, Jaipur Act, 2012_Section 12--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) The Vice-Chancellor shall be the principal executive and academic officer of the University and shall, in the absence of the Chancellor, preside at the convocations of the University. (2) The Vice-Chancellor shall be ex-officio Chairman of the Board and Academic Council. (3) The Vice-Chancellor shall be responsible for presenting to the Board for its deliberations and consideration matters of concern to the University. He or she shall have power to convene the meetings of the Board and the Academic Council and such other authorities and bodies as may be prescribed. (4) The Vice-Chancellor shall exercise general control over the affairs of the University and shall be responsible for the due maintenance of discipline in the University. (5) The Vice-Chancellor shall ensure the faithful observance of the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations and shall possess all such powers as may be necessary for the purpose. (6) In an emergency, which in the opinion of the Vice-Chancellor requires immediate action to be taken, he or she shall take such action as he or she deems necessary and shall at the earliest opportunity report the action taken to the officer, authority or other body who or which in the ordinary course would have dealt with the matter. (7) Where any action taken by the Vice-Chancellor under sub-section (6) affects any person in the service of the University to his disadvantage, such person may prefer an appeal to the Board within thirty days of the date on which the action is communicated to him. (8) Subject as aforesaid, the Vice-Chancellor shall give effect to the orders of the Board regarding the appointment, suspension and dismissal of officers, teachers and other employees of the University. (9) The Vice-Chancellor shall be responsible for close coordination and integration of teaching, research and other work and shall exercise such other powers as may be prescribed.
Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar Law University, Jaipur Act, 2012_Section 13--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) The Registrar shall be the Chief Administrative Officer of the University. He or she shall work directly under the superintendence, direction and control of the Vice-Chancellor. (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any other law for the time being in force, the Registrar shall be appointed by the State Government on deputation from amongst the officers of the Rajasthan Administrative Service (not below Selection Scale). (3) The Registrar shall be the ex-officio Secretary to the Board, the Academic Council and any other authority declared by the Statutes to be the Authority of the University. (4) It shall be the duty of the Registrar- (a) to be the custodian of the records, the Common Seal and such other properties of the University as the Board shall commit to his or her charge; and (b) to issue all notices convening meetings of the Board, the Academic Council, the Faculties, the Board of Studies, and of any committee appointed by the authorities of the University. (5) (i) Where any proceedings or resolution of the Board or order of the Vice-Chancellor is inconsistent with the provisions of this Act and the Statutes made thereunder, it shall be the duty of the Registrar to tender advice to the Board or the Vice-Chancellor mentioning the relevant provisions and record in the proceedings to the meeting of the Board or on the order of the Vice-Chancellor the fact that he or she had tendered such advice and thereupon put up a note of dissent on such proceedings, resolution, the order or as the case may be, and ensure the communication of the matter to the Chancellor or any officer authorized by him or her in this behalf within seven days of passing such resolution or order, or as the case may be, undertaking such proceedings. (ii) After examining the note of dissent reported under sub-clause (i), the Chancellor or the officer authorized in this behalf by him or her, may make such interim or final order as he or she thinks fit, which shall be binding on the University: Provided that if no such interim or final order is passed within a period of thirty days from the date of receipt of the dissent note, the Board or, as the case may be, Vice-Chancellor may proceed with the proceedings or the resolution or, as the case may be, the order as if the dissent note was not put up. (6) The Registrar shall be responsible to ensure the compliance of the provisions of section 41. (7) The Registrar shall exercise such powers and perform such other functions and discharge such other duties as may be prescribed or required of him or her from time to time by the Vice-Chancellor or by the Board.
Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar Law University, Jaipur Act, 2012_Section 14--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) The Comptroller shall be the principal finance, accounts and audit officer of the University. He or she shall work directly under the control of the Vice-Chancellor. (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any other law for the time being in force, the Comptroller shall be appointed by the State Government on deputation from amongst the officers of the Rajasthan Accounts Service (not below selection scale). (3) The Comptroller shall be the ex-officio Member-Secretary to the Finance Committee. (4) The Comptroller shall- (a) exercise general supervision over the funds of the University and shall advise the University as regards its financial policy; (b) to manage the property and investments of the University including trust and endowed property in accordance with the decision of the Finance Committee and the Board; and (c) exercise such other powers and perform such other financial functions, as may be assigned to him or her by the Board, or as may be prescribed: Provided that the Comptroller shall not incur any expenditure or make any investment exceeding such amount as may be prescribed except with the prior approval of the Board. (5) Subject to the control of the Board, the Comptroller shall- (a) ensure that the limits fixed by the Board for recurring and non-recurring expenditure for a year are not exceeded and that all moneys are expended for the purposes for which they are granted or allotted; (b) be responsible for the preparation of annual accounts, financial estimates and the budget of the University and for their presentation to the Finance Committee and the Board; (c) keep a constant watch on the cash and bank balances and of investments; (d) watch the progress of the collection of revenue and advise on the methods of collection employed; (e) ensure that the registers of buildings, land, furniture and equipments are maintained up-to-date, and that stock checking is conducted in respect of equipments and other consumable materials in all offices, laboratories, colleges and institutions maintained by the University; (f) ensure that no expenditure not authorized in the budget is incurred by the University otherwise than by way of investment and to bring to the notice of the Vice-Chancellor and the Registrar any unauthorized expenditure or other financial irregularity and suggest appropriate action to be taken against persons at fault; (g) disallow any expenditure which may contravene the terms of any Statute or for which provision is required to be made by a Statute but has not been made; (h) call from any office, laboratory, college or institution maintained by the University, any information or returns as he or she may consider necessary for the exercise of his or her powers, performance of his or her functions or discharge of his or her duties; and (i) ensure the compliance of the provisions of sections 33, 34 and 35.
Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar Law University, Jaipur Act, 2012_Section 15--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) The Board may appoint any one or more of the following officers, namely:- (a) the Estate Officer; and (b) the Dean of Student Welfare. (2) The Estate Officer shall be incharge of all the buildings, lawns, gardens and other immovable property of the University. (3) The Dean of Student Welfare shall have the following duties:- (a) to make arrangements of the housing of students; (b) to direct a programme of students counselling; (c) to arrange for employment of students in accordance with plans approved by the Vice-Chancellor; (d) to supervise the extra-curricular activities of the students; (e) to assist in the placement of the graduates of the University; and (f) to organize and maintain contact with the alumni of the University.
Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar Law University, Jaipur Act, 2012_Section 16--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) There shall be a Dean of each faculty. (2) The Deans of faculties shall be appointed by the Vice-Chancellor in a manner as may be prescribed. (3) The Deans shall perform such functions as may be prescribed by the Statutes.
Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar Law University, Jaipur Act, 2012_Section 17--> State(s): Rajasthan The mode of appointment and the functions of other officers mentioned in clause (a) of section 10 and of the employees of the University shall be as provided in this Act or as prescribed by Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations.
Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar Law University, Jaipur Act, 2012_Section 18--> State(s): Rajasthan No officer or employee of the University shall be offered nor shall he or she accept any remuneration for any work in the University save as may be provided for in the Statutes.
Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar Law University, Jaipur Act, 2012_Section 19--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) The Board shall be the highest executive body of the University and shall consist of the following members, namely:- (I) the Vice-Chancellor of the University - Chairman; (II) Ex-officio Members- (i) the Principal Secretary to the Government of Rajasthan, Finance Department; (ii) the Principal Secretary to the Government of Rajasthan, Higher Education Department; (iii) the Principal Secretary to the Government of Rajasthan, Law Department; (iv) the Director of College Education, Rajasthan; and (v) the Registrar of the University, Member-Secretary. Explanation.- Ex-officio members mentioned at (i) to (iii) shall include their respective nominees who shall not be below the rank of a Deputy Secretary to the Government of Rajasthan. (III) Nominated Members- (i) two persons nominated by the Vice-Chancellor from amongst the Deans for one year; (ii) two University Professors nominated by the Vice-Chancellor for one year; (iii) two eminent educationists to be nominated by the Chancellor for three years; (iv) two Principals of affiliated colleges, one from the Government Colleges and another from Private Colleges, to be nominated by the State Government for one year; (v) two members of State Legislature to be nominated by the State Government for three years; and (vi) two eminent educationists to be nominated by the State Government for three years; and (IV) Elected Members - Two teachers of the University or its constituent or affiliated colleges who have put in not less than seven years teaching experience in any institution of higher education in Rajasthan on 1st January immediately preceding the year in which elections are held, other than University professors, Deans, Directors of the Colleges of the University, to be elected by the teachers of the University and its constituent colleges from amongst themselves for three years. (2) One-third members present at a meeting of the Board shall constitute the quorum for meeting. (3) The Chairman of the Board shall perform such functions and exercise such powers as are provided in this Act or as may be prescribed. (4) The members shall serve without any additional pay but shall be entitled to daily allowance and travelling expenses as may be prescribed. (5) The minutes of meeting of the Board shall be recorded and maintained by the Member-Secretary of the Board.
Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar Law University, Jaipur Act, 2012_Section 20--> State(s): Rajasthan The duties and functions of the Board shall be as follows:- (a) to approve and sanction the budget of the University; (b) to acquire, to dispose of, to hold and to control the property and funds of the University and issue any general or special direction on behalf of the University; (c) to accept the transfer of any movable or immovable property on behalf of the University; (d) to administer any funds placed at the disposal of the University for the specific purposes; (e) to invest money belonging to the University; (f) to appoint the members of the academic, administrative and other staff of the University in such manner as may be prescribed; (g) to direct the form and use of the Common Seal of the University; (h) to appoint such committees, either standing or temporary, as it deems necessary for its proper functioning; (i) to borrow money for capital improvements and make suitable arrangements for its repayment; (j) to meet at such times and as often as it deems necessary, provided however, that the regular meeting of the Board shall be held at least once in every three months; (k) to make Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations in the manner prescribed in this Act for smooth functioning of the University; and (l) to regulate and determine all matters concerning the University in accordance with this Act and the Statutes and to exercise such powers and to discharge such duties as may be conferred or imposed on it by this Act and the Statutes.
Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar Law University, Jaipur Act, 2012_Section 21--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) There shall be an Academic Council of the University, consisting of the following as members, namely:- (a) the Vice-Chancellor-Ex-officio Chairman; (b) Deans of Faculties; (c) one Professor from each faculty to be nominated by the Vice-Chancellor; (d) one Principal of a constituent college to be nominated by the Vice-Chancellor; (e) the Principal Secretary to the Government of Rajasthan, Higher Education Department or his nominee not below the rank of a Deputy Secretary to the Government of Rajasthan; (f) Director of College Education, Rajasthan; (g) Chairmen, Boards of Studies; (h) two Principals of affiliated colleges, one from Government Colleges and another from Private Colleges, to be nominated by the State Government; (i) two persons having special attainment in the field of studies not being employees of the University, one to be nominated by the Chancellor and the other by the State Government; (j) one teacher other than the Professors, from a constituent college/University Department having a minimum ten years experience in teaching degree or post-graduate classes, to be nominated by the Vice-Chancellor; (k) one teacher other than the Principals, from an affiliated college having a minimum ten years experience in teaching degree or post-graduate classes to be nominated by the State Government; and (l) the Registrar of the University, Member-Secretary. (2) The term of office of nominated members shall be two years.
Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar Law University, Jaipur Act, 2012_Section 22--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) The Academic Council shall be incharge of the academic affairs of the University and shall subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes and Ordinances made thereunder have control over, and be responsible for the maintenance of standards of instructions, education and examinations and for the requirements for the award of degrees and diplomas. (2) The Academic Council shall exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be conferred or imposed upon it by the Statutes and shall advise the Vice-Chancellor on all academic matters.
Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar Law University, Jaipur Act, 2012_Section 23--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) There shall be such faculties in the University as may be prescribed by the Statutes. (2) Each faculty shall consist of the following:- (a) Dean of the Faculty - Chairman; (b) University professors of the subjects assigned to the Faculty; (c) Chairmen of the Boards of Studies in the Faculty; (d) one Post-graduate College Principal and one Post-graduate Department Head in each subject of the Faculty from affiliated colleges, nominated by the State Government; and (e) two External experts nominated by the Academic Council. (3) Faculty shall perform such functions as may be prescribed by the Statutes.
Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar Law University, Jaipur Act, 2012_Section 24--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) There shall be such number of Boards of Studies as may be determined by the Statutes. (2) A Board of Studies shall be constituted in the manner, consist of such members, exercise such powers and perform such functions as may be prescribed.
Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar Law University, Jaipur Act, 2012_Section 25--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) The Finance Committee shall consist of the following members, namely:- (a) the Vice-Chancellor, who shall be the Chairman of the Committee; (b) the Principal Secretary to the Government of Rajasthan, Finance Department, or his nominee not below the rank of Deputy Secretary to Government; (c) the Principal Secretary to the Government of Rajasthan, Higher Education Department, or his nominee not below the rank of Deputy Secretary to Government; (d) one member of the Board, to be nominated by the Board from amongst its non-official members; (e) two professors, by rotation, to be nominated by the Board; and (f) the Comptroller, who shall be the Member-Secretary of the Committee. (2) The term of office of the members nominated under clauses (d) and (e) shall be two years.
Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar Law University, Jaipur Act, 2012_Section 26--> State(s): Rajasthan Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the Finance Committee shall broadly perform the following functions, namely:- (i) to examine the annual accounts and annual budget estimates of the University and to advise the Board thereon; (ii) to review from time to time the financial position of the University; (iii) to make recommendations to the Board on all financial policy matters of the University; (iv) to make recommendations to the Board on all proposals involving raising of funds, receipts and expenditure; (v) to provide guidelines for investment of surplus funds; (vi) to make recommendations to the Board on all proposals involving expenditure for which no provision has been made in the budget or for which expenditure in excess of the amount provided in the budget needs to be incurred; (vii) to examine all proposals relating to the revision of pay-scales, up gradation of the scales and those items which are not included in the budget prior to placing before the Board; and (viii) to exercise such other powers and perform such other functions as may be conferred or imposed upon it by the Regulations.
Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar Law University, Jaipur Act, 2012_Section 27--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) All teaching recognized by the University shall be conducted in the University departments or in colleges, institutes and institutions. (2) The authorities responsible for organizing such teaching shall be such as may be prescribed. (3) The courses of study and curricula shall be such as may be prescribed by Ordinances and, subject thereto, by the Regulations.
Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar Law University, Jaipur Act, 2012_Section 28--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) The appointment of teachers and officers of the University shall be made in accordance with provisions of the Rajasthan Universities' Teachers and Officers (Selection for Appointment) Act, 1974 (Act No. 18 of 1974). (2) Except in cases provided for by the Statutes, teachers and officers of the University shall be appointed under a written contract. The contract shall be lodged with the Vice-Chancellor and a copy thereof shall be furnished to the teacher or officer concerned. The contract shall not be inconsistent with the provisions of this Act and the Statutes for the time being in force in relation to the conditions of service.
Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar Law University, Jaipur Act, 2012_Section 29--> State(s): Rajasthan Subject to any provision in the Statutes to the contrary or any directions or policy of the State Government in this regard, all the employees of the University shall ordinarily retire from service upon attaining the age of sixty years.
Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar Law University, Jaipur Act, 2012_Section 30--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) For the benefit of its officers, teachers, clerical staff and other employees, the University shall constitute, in such manner and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, such pension, gratuity, insurance and provident fund as it may deem fit. (2) The provisions of the Provident Funds Act, 1925 (Central Act No. 19 of 1925), shall apply to a fund or an insurance scheme as if it were a State Government fund or scheme and the University shall contribute to or invest in such fund or scheme. (3) Provision shall be made in the Statutes to ensure that staff members transferred from employment in the service of the State shall have their accrued service benefits protected upon such transfer.
Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar Law University, Jaipur Act, 2012_Section 31--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) An affiliated college or a recognized institution or a University Department may be conferred the autonomous status by the University in the matter of admission of students, prescribing the courses of studies, imparting instructions and training, holding of examinations and the powers to make necessary rules for the purpose. (2) The Board shall for the purpose of satisfying itself about the standards of education in such a college, institution or department may direct an enquiry to be made in the prescribed manner by a standing committee consisting of such persons as are deemed fit. (3) On receipt of the report of the said committee and the recommendations of the Academic Council thereon, the Board on being satisfied, shall refer the matter to the University Grants Commission and the State Government to obtain their concurrence. (4) On receipt of such concurrence, the University shall confer the autonomous status on the college, the institution or the department, as the case may be. (5) The status of autonomy may be granted initially for a period of five years subject to review by an expert committee to be constituted for this purpose. The committee shall comprise the following, namely:- (a) one nominee of the University; (b) one nominee of the State Government; (c) one nominee of the University Grants Commission; (d) one Principal of an autonomous college to be nominated by the Vice-Chancellor; and (e) an officer of the University to be nominated by the Vice-Chancellor. (6) The Committee shall submit its report to the Board for further action. (7) The University shall continue to exercise general supervision over such college, institution or department and to confer degrees on the students of such college, institution or department. (8) The autonomous college, institution or department shall appoint such committees as may be prescribed for the proper management relating to academic, financial and administrative affairs. (9) Every autonomous college, institution or department shall furnish such reports, returns and other information as the Board may require from time to time. (10) The Board shall cause every autonomous college, institution or department to be inspected from time to time.
Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar Law University, Jaipur Act, 2012_Section 32--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) The conferment of autonomous status may be withdrawn by the University if the college, institution or department has failed to observe any of the conditions of its conferment or the efficiency thereof has so deteriorated that in the interest of education it is necessary to do so. (2) Before an order under sub-section (1) is made, the Board shall, by one month's notice in writing, call upon the college, institution or department to show cause why such an order should not be made. (3) On receipt of the explanation, if any, made by the college, institution or department in reply to the notice, the Board shall, after consulting the Academic Council and the University Grants Commission report the matter to the State Government. (4) The State Government shall, after such further enquiry, if any, as may be deemed fit, record its opinion in the matter and convey its decision to the University and the University shall thereupon make such order as it deems fit. (5) Where in the case of an autonomous college, institution or department, the autonomous status conferred under section 31 is withdrawn by an order made under sub-section (4), such college, institution or department, as the case may be, shall cease to have an autonomous status from the date specified in the order.
Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar Law University, Jaipur Act, 2012_Section 33--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) The University shall establish, maintain and administer a fund to be called the University fund. (2) The following moneys shall form part of, and be paid into, the University fund, namely:- (a) any contribution or grant by the State Government; (b) income arising to the University from all sources including income from fees and charges; (c) trusts, bequests, donations, endowments and other grants, if any; and (d) such other money as may be prescribed by the Statutes. (3) The matters to which the fund may be applied and appropriated shall be those prescribed by this Act or the Statutes. (4) All expenses incurred under and in pursuance of any provision contained in this Act shall be met out of the University fund. (5) The University shall have power to borrow, on the security of the University properties and with the concurrence of the State Government money for the purposes of the University.
Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar Law University, Jaipur Act, 2012_Section 34--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) The annual accounts and balance sheet of the University shall be prepared by the Comptroller under the direction of the Vice-Chancellor and all moneys accruing to or received by the University from whatever source and all amount disbursed or paid shall be entered in the accounts. (2) The Comptroller shall, before such date as may be prescribed by the Statutes, prepare the annual financial estimates for the ensuing year. (3) The annual accounts and the annual financial estimates prepared by the Comptroller shall be placed before the Board together with the remarks of the Finance Committee for approval and the Board may pass resolution with reference thereto and communicate the same to the Comptroller who shall take action in accordance therewith. (4) The annual accounts shall be audited in the prescribed manner by such auditors as the State Government may direct and the cost of such audit shall be a charge on the University fund. (5) The accounts when audited shall be printed and copies thereof, together with the audit report, shall be submitted by the Vice-Chancellor to the Board which shall forward them to the State Government with such comments as may be deemed necessary. (6) The University shall settle objections raised in the audit and carry out such instructions as may be issued by the State Government on the audit report.
Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar Law University, Jaipur Act, 2012_Section 35--> State(s): Rajasthan Where the State Government funds are involved, the University shall abide by the terms and conditions attached to the sanction of such funds which may inter alia include prior permission of the State Government in respect of the following, namely:- (a) creation of the new posts of teachers, officers or other employees; (b) revision of the pay, allowances, post-retirement benefits and other benefits to its teachers, officers and other employees; (c) grant of any additional/special pay, allowance or other extra remuneration of any description whatsoever, including ex-gratia payment or other benefits having financial implications, to any of its teachers, officers or other employees; (d) diversion of any earmarked funds other than the purpose for which it was received; (e) transfer by sale, lease, mortgage or otherwise of immovable property; (f) incur expenditure on any development work from the funds received from the State Government for any purposes other than for which the funds are received; and (g) take any decision resulting in increased financial liability, direct or indirect, for the State Government. Explanation.- The above conditions shall also apply in respect of the posts created from any other fund, which may, in the long term, be likely to cause financial implications to the State Government.
Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar Law University, Jaipur Act, 2012_Section 36--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) The State Government shall have the right to cause an inquiry to be made, by such person or persons as it may direct, and to issue directions to the University, in respect of any matter connected with the finances of the University, where State Government funds are concerned. (2) If the State Government is satisfied that owing to mal-administration or financial mismanagement in the University a situation has arisen whereby financial stability of the University has become insecure, it may by a notification, declare that the finances of the University shall be subject to the control of the State Government and shall issue such other directions as it may deem fit for the purpose and the same shall be binding on the University.
Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar Law University, Jaipur Act, 2012_Section 37--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) All casual vacancies among the members (other than ex-officio members) of any authority or body of the University shall be filled as soon as possible by appointment, nomination or election according as the member whose place became vacant was appointed, nominated or elected and the person appointed, nominated or elected to a casual vacancy shall be a member of such authority or body for the residuary period of the term for which the person whose place he fills would have continued but for the vacancy. (2) A person who holds any office in the University by virtue of his holding any other office of the University or otherwise shall hold such office as long as he holds the other office and thereafter till his successor is duly nominated, appointed or elected, as the case may be. (3) The Board may remove any person not being an officer of the University from membership of any authority or body or any employee of the University on the grounds that such person or employee has been convicted of an offence involving moral turpitude or for taking part in subversive activities or for indulging in any act or acts unbecoming of the prestige of the University: Provided that no such person or employee shall be removed under this sub-section unless he has been afforded a reasonable opportunity of showing cause why he should not be so removed and such cause has been considered by the Board: Provided further that prior approval of the State Government will be necessary for taking such action against a member of any authority or body of the University, nominated by the State Government. (4) If any question arises regarding any person who has been appointed, nominated or elected, as or is entitled to be, a member of any authority of the University subordinate to the Board or regarding any decision of the Board under this Act and the Statutes, the matter shall be referred to the Chancellor for his or her decision, and the decision of the Chancellor shall be final.
Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar Law University, Jaipur Act, 2012_Section 38--> State(s): Rajasthan No act or proceeding of any authority or body of the University shall be invalidated by reason of the existence of a vacancy among its members or by reason of some person having taken part in the proceedings who is subsequently found not to have been entitled to do so.
Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar Law University, Jaipur Act, 2012_Section 39--> State(s): Rajasthan Where any provision of this Act or of the Statutes, Ordinances or Regulations refer to an officer of the State Government by designation, then if that designation is altered or that office ceases to exist, the reference shall be construed as a reference to the altered designation, or as the case may be, to such corresponding officer as the State Government directs.
Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar Law University, Jaipur Act, 2012_Section 40--> State(s): Rajasthan Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any other law for the time being in force, the State Government may, by order in writing, call for any information from the University on any matter relating to the affairs of the University and, the University shall, if such information is available with it, furnish the State Government with such information within a reasonable period.
Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar Law University, Jaipur Act, 2012_Section 41--> State(s): Rajasthan The Annual Report of the University shall be prepared under the direction of the Vice-Chancellor and circulated among the members of the Board one month before the annual meeting of the Board at which it is to be considered. The Annual Report, as approved by the Board, shall be sent to the State Government for being laid on the table of the House of the State Legislature.
Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar Law University, Jaipur Act, 2012_Section 42--> State(s): Rajasthan Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes may provide for any matter and shall, in particular, provide for the following:- (a) the constitution, powers and duties of the authorities of the University; (b) the appointment, nomination or election and continuance in office of the members of the authorities of the University and all other matters relating to these authorities for which it may be necessary or desirable to provide; (c) the designation, manner of appointment, powers, duties and service conditions of the officers of the University; (d) the classification and manner of appointment of teachers and their service conditions and qualifications; (e) the constitution of pension, gratuity, insurance and provident funds for the benefit of officers, teachers and other employees of the University; (f) the conferment of honorary degrees; (g) the establishment, amalgamation, sub-division and abolition of departments; (h) the establishment and abolition of hostels maintained by the University; (i) the moneys to form part of and to be paid into the University fund and the matters to which the fund may be applied and appropriated; (j) the number and emoluments of teachers of the University and the preparation and maintenance of a record of their services and activities; (k) the remuneration and allowances including travelling and daily allowances to be paid to persons employed in the business of the University; and (l) all other matters which by this Act are required to be or may be provided for or prescribed otherwise than by the Ordinances and Regulations.
Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar Law University, Jaipur Act, 2012_Section 43--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) The Statutes may be made, amended or repealed by the Board in the manner hereinafter provided. (2) The Board may take into consideration the draft of a Statute either at its own motion or on a proposal by any authority of the University. (3) The Board, if it thinks necessary, may also obtain the opinion of any officer, authority or body of the University in regard to any draft Statute, which is before it for consideration. (4) Every Statute passed by the Board shall be submitted to the Chancellor who may give or withhold his assent thereto or send it back to the Board for reconsideration. (5) No Statute passed by the Board shall be valid or shall come into force until assented to by the Chancellor. (6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing sub-section, the Chancellor may, either suo motu or on the advice of the State Government, direct the University to make provisions in the Statutes in respect of any matter specified by him or her and if the Board fails to implement such a direction within sixty days of its receipt, the Chancellor may, after considering the reasons, if any communicated by the Board for its inability to comply with such direction, make or amend the Statutes suitably.
Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar Law University, Jaipur Act, 2012_Section 44--> State(s): Rajasthan Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, the Ordinances may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:- (a) the courses of study, admission or enrolment of students, fee, qualifications or conditions requisite for any degree, diploma, certificate or fellowship; (b) the conduct of examinations including the appointments of examiners and their terms and conditions; (c) the conditions for residing in any hostel or other place of residence run or maintained by the University, the levying of charges therefor and other related matters; (d) the recognition and supervision of hostels not run or maintained by the University; and (e) any other matter required by this Act or the Statutes to be dealt by or under the Ordinances of the University.
Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar Law University, Jaipur Act, 2012_Section 45--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) The Board may make, amend or repeal Ordinances in the manner hereinafter provided. (2) No Ordinances concerning the academic matter shall be made by the Board unless a draft thereof has been proposed by the Academic Council. (3) The Board shall not have the power to amend any draft proposed by the Academic Council under sub-section (2), but may reject or return it to the Academic Council for reconsideration, in part or in whole, together with any amendments which the Board may suggest. (4) All Ordinances made by the Board shall have effect from such date as it may direct, but every Ordinance so made shall be submitted to the Chancellor within two weeks. The Chancellor shall have the power to direct the Board, within four weeks of the receipt of the Ordinance to suspend its operation, and he or she shall, as soon as possible, inform the Board of his or her objection to it. He or she may after receiving the comments of the Board, either withdraw the order suspending the Ordinance or disallow the Ordinance and his or her decision shall be final.
Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar Law University, Jaipur Act, 2012_Section 46--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) Every authority of the University may make Regulations consistent with this Act and the Statutes and Ordinances- (a) laying down the procedure to be observed at their meetings and the number of members required to form a quorum; (b) providing for all matters which by this Act and the Statutes or Ordinances are to be provided for by that authority by the Regulations; and (c) providing for any other matter solely concerning such authority and not provided for by this Act and the Statutes or Ordinances. (2) Every authority of the University shall make Regulations providing for the giving of notice to the members of such authority of the dates of meetings and of the business to be transacted thereat and for the keeping of a record of the proceeding of meetings. (3) The Board may direct the amendment, in such manner as it may specify, of any Regulations made under this section or the annulment thereof by any authority of the University.
Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar Law University, Jaipur Act, 2012_Section 47--> State(s): Rajasthan The Board may, by Statute, delegate to any officer or authority any of the powers conferred upon it by this Act, to be exercised subject to such restrictions and conditions as may be prescribed.
Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar Law University, Jaipur Act, 2012_Section 48--> State(s): Rajasthan Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, the Chancellor may, in order to give effect to the provisions of this Act, on the advice of the State Government, make such orders as are deemed necessary, for the transfer of- (a) any officer, teacher, employee or servant, (b) any movable or immovable property situated in the jurisdictional area of this University or any rights or interest therein, and (c) any fund, grant, contribution, donation, aid or benefaction received, accrued or promised, from the University of Rajasthan or any other University to this University on such terms and conditions as may be specified in the orders.
Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar Law University, Jaipur Act, 2012_Section 49--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) All Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations made under the University of Rajasthan Act, 1946 shall, in so far as they are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, be deemed to have been made under this Act and shall continue to be in force until they are superseded or modified by the Statutes, Ordinances or Regulations made under this Act. (2) All notices and orders, made or issued by any authority under the University of Rajasthan Act, 1946 shall, in so far as they are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, be deemed to have been made or issued by the corresponding authority under this Act and shall continue to be in force until they are superseded or modified under this Act.
Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar Law University, Jaipur Act, 2012_Section 50--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) At any time after the commencement of this Act and until such time as the authorities of the University are duly constituted, any officer of the University may be appointed by the Vice-Chancellor, with the prior approval of the Chancellor, to carry on the duties of any such authority. (2) The Vice-Chancellor may make temporary appointments subject to the approval of the Board at its next meeting, following the making of such appointment.
Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar Law University, Jaipur Act, 2012_Section 51--> State(s): Rajasthan The Board shall have the authority to deal with any matter pertaining to the University and not specifically dealt with in this Act. The decision of the Board on all such matters shall, subject to revision by the Chancellor, be final and shall not be liable to be challenged in any Court or Tribunal.
Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar Law University, Jaipur Act, 2012_Section 52--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) The State Government may for the purpose of removing any difficulties, in the area and in matters covered by this Act, by order published in the Official Gazette,- (a) direct that this Act shall during such period as may be specified in the order take effect subject to such adaptations whether by way of modification, addition or omission consistent with this Act, as it may deem fit to be necessary or expedient; or (b) give such directions as appear to it to be necessary for the removal of such difficulties that may arise in giving effect to the provisions of this Act; or (c) make such other temporary provisions for the purpose of removing any such difficulties as it may deem fit to be necessary or expedient: Provided that no such order shall be made after twelve months from the date of the commencement of this Act. (2) All orders made under sub-section (1) shall be laid before the House of the State Legislature for fourteen days which may be comprised in one session or in two successive sessions and if before the expiry of the session in which they are so laid or of the session immediately following, the House of the State Legislature makes any modification in any of such orders or resolves that any such order should not be made, such order shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be, so however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done thereunder. (3) If any question arises regarding the interpretation of any provisions of this Act or any Statutes or Ordinances or Regulations made under this Act, or as to whether any person has been duly appointed as or is entitled to be a member of any authority or other body of the University, the matter may be referred to the Chancellor and shall be so referred if the Vice-Chancellor and any ten members of the Board so require. The Chancellor shall after taking such advice from the State Government as he or she deems necessary, decide the question and his or her decision shall be final.
Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar Law University, Jaipur Act, 2012_Section 53--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) The Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar Law University, Jaipur Ordinance, 2012 (Ordinance No. 8 of 2012) is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, all things done, actions taken or orders made under the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done, taken or made under this Act. Principal Secretary to the Government. 
