Factories (Rajasthan Amendment) Act, 2014_Section Preamble--> State(s): Rajasthan An Act further to amend the Factories Act, 1948 in its application to the State of Rajasthan. Be it enacted by the Rajasthan State Legislature in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of India, as follows:-
Factories (Rajasthan Amendment) Act, 2014_Section 1--> State(s): Rajasthan (1) This Act may be called the Factories (Rajasthan Amendment) Act, 2014. (2) It shall extend to the whole of the State of Rajasthan. (3) It shall come into force on and from the date of its publication in the Official Gazette.
Factories (Rajasthan Amendment) Act, 2014_Section 2--> State(s): Rajasthan In section 2 of the Factories Act, 1948 (Central Act No. 63 of 1948), in its application to the State of Rajasthan, hereinafter referred to as the principal Act,- (i) in sub-clause (i) of clause (m), for the existing word "ten", the word "twenty" shall be substituted; and (ii) in sub-clause (ii) of clause (m), for the existing word "twenty", the word "forty" shall be substituted.
Factories (Rajasthan Amendment) Act, 2014_Section 3--> State(s): Rajasthan In clause (i) of sub-section (1) of section 85 of the principal Act, for the existing words "ten" and "twenty", the words "twenty" and "forty" shall be substituted respectively.
Factories (Rajasthan Amendment) Act, 2014_Section 4--> State(s): Rajasthan For the existing sub-section (1) of section 105 of the principal Act, the following shall be substituted, namely:- "(1) No Court shall take cognizance of any offence under this Act except on complaint by an Inspector with the previous sanction in writing by the State Government.".
Factories (Rajasthan Amendment) Act, 2014_Section 5--> State(s): Rajasthan After the existing section 106A and before the existing section 107 of the principal Act, the following shall be inserted, namely:- "106B. Compounding of offences. - The Inspector may, subject to any general or special order of the State Government in this behalf, compound any offence punishable under this Act with fine only, and committed for the first time, either before or after the institution of the prosecution, on realisation of such amount of composition fee as he thinks fit not exceeding the maximum amount of fine fixed for the offence; and where the offence is so compounded,- (i) before the institution of the prosecution, the offender shall not be liable to prosecution, for such offence and shall, if in custody, be set at liberty; (ii) after the institution of the prosecution the composition shall amount to acquittal of the offender.". Principal Secretary to the Government. 
