Rajasthan Finance Act, 2011_Section Preamble--> State(s): Rajasthan An Act further to amend the Rajasthan Value Added Tax Act, 2003, the Rajasthan Entertainments and Advertisements Tax Act, 1957, the Rajasthan Electricity (Duty) Act, 1962, the Rajasthan Stamp Act, 1998, the Rajasthan Excise Act, 1950, the Rajasthan Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1951 and the Rajasthan Local Fund Audit Act, 1954, in order to give effect to the financial proposals of the State Government for financial year 2011-12 and to make certain other provisions. Be it enacted by the Rajasthan State Legislature in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India, as follows:-
Rajasthan Finance Act, 2011_Section 1--> State(s): Rajasthan This Act may be called the Rajasthan Finance Act, 2011.
Rajasthan Finance Act, 2011_Section 2--> State(s): Rajasthan In pursuance of section 3 of the Rajasthan Provisional Collection of Taxes Act, 1958 (Act No. 23 of 1958) it is hereby declared that it is expedient in the public interest that provisions of clauses 7, 22, 24, 28 and 29 of this Bill shall have immediate effect under the said Act.
Rajasthan Finance Act, 2011_Section 3--> State(s): Rajasthan In section 2 of the Rajasthan Value Added Tax Act, 2003 (Act No. 4 of 2003), hereinafter in this Chapter referred to as the principal Act,- (i) after the existing sub-clause (d) and before the existing explanation of clause (26), the following new sub-clause shall be inserted, namely:- "(e) any warehouse, railway station, railway goods yard, parcel office, or any other place where goods for transportation in the course of business or otherwise are kept by dealers;"; and (ii) for the existing clause (44), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:- "(44) "works contract" means a contract for carrying out any work which includes assembling, construction, building, altering, manufacturing, processing, fabricating, erection, installation, fitting out, improvement, repair or commissioning of any movable or immovable property;".
Rajasthan Finance Act, 2011_Section 4--> State(s): Rajasthan In sub-section (2) of section 3 of the principal Act, for the existing expression "rupees fifty lacs", the expression "rupees sixty lacs" shall be substituted.
Rajasthan Finance Act, 2011_Section 5--> State(s): Rajasthan In sub-section (7) of section 4 of the principal Act, for the existing punctuation mark ".", appearing at the end of the existing proviso, the punctuation mark ":" shall be substituted and after the existing proviso, so amended, the following new proviso shall be added, namely:- "Provided further that a dealer who opts payment of tax under this sub-section shall not allow any trade discount or incentive in terms of quantity of goods in relation to any sale of goods covered under this sub-section, effected by him, for the purpose of calculating his tax liability.".
Rajasthan Finance Act, 2011_Section 6--> State(s): Rajasthan In sub-section (1) of section 15 of the principal Act, for the existing punctuation mark ".", appearing at the end, the punctuation mark ":" shall be substituted and thereafter the following new proviso shall be added, namely:- "Provided that no security under this section shall be required to be furnished by a department of the Central Government or the State Government or a public sector undertaking, corporation or company owned or controlled by the Central Government or the State Government.".
Rajasthan Finance Act, 2011_Section 7--> State(s): Rajasthan In section 18 of the principal Act,- (i) for the existing clause (g) of sub-section (1), the following shall be substituted, namely:- "(g) being used in the State as capital goods in manufacture of goods other than exempted goods,"; (ii) after the existing clause (ii) and before the existing clause (iii) of sub-section (3), the following shall be inserted, namely:- "(iia) of goods taxable at first point in the series of sales, from a registered dealer who pays tax at the first point; Explanation.-For the purpose of this clause, "first point in the series of sales" means the first sale made by a registered dealer in the State; or"; and (iii) after the existing sub-section (3) and before the existing sub-section (4), the following new sub-section shall be inserted, namely:- "(3A) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, where any goods purchased in the State are subsequently sold at subsidized price, the input tax allowable under this section in respect of such goods shall not exceed the output tax payable on such goods.".
Rajasthan Finance Act, 2011_Section 8--> State(s): Rajasthan For the existing sub-section (1) of section 21 of the principal Act, the following shall be substituted, namely:- "(1) Every registered dealer shall assess his liability under this Act, and shall furnish return, for such period, in such form and manner, and within such time and with such late fee not exceeding fifty thousand rupees, for delayed furnishing of returns, as may be prescribed, to the assessing authority or to the officer authorized by the Commissioner.".
Rajasthan Finance Act, 2011_Section 9--> State(s): Rajasthan After the existing sub-section (4) of section 25 of the principal Act, the following explanation shall be inserted, namely:- "Explanation.-For the purpose of this section the expression "date of making out the case" means the date on which notice in pursuance of this section is issued for the first time to the dealer.".
Rajasthan Finance Act, 2011_Section 10--> State(s): Rajasthan In sub-section (4) of section 38 of the principal Act, for the existing punctuation mark ".", appearing at the end of the existing proviso, the punctuation mark ":" shall be substituted and after the existing proviso, so amended, the following new proviso shall be added, namely:- "Provided further that no security under this section shall be required to be furnished by a department of the Central Government or the State Government or a public sector undertaking, corporation or company owned or controlled by the Central Government or the State Government.".
Rajasthan Finance Act, 2011_Section 11--> State(s): Rajasthan In section 53 of the principal Act,- (i) in sub-section (1), the existing proviso shall be deleted; and (ii) for the existing sub-section (4), the following shall be substituted, namely:- "(4) An amount refundable under this Act shall be refunded within thirty days from the date on which it becomes due and if such amount is not refunded within the aforesaid period of thirty days, it shall carry interest with effect from the date of expiry of the aforesaid period up to the date of payment, at such rate as may be notified by the State Government.".
Rajasthan Finance Act, 2011_Section 12--> State(s): Rajasthan The existing section 58 of the principal Act shall be deleted.
Rajasthan Finance Act, 2011_Section 13--> State(s): Rajasthan In section 80 of the principal Act,- (i) the existing expression "obtain certificate and", appearing in the marginal heading, shall be deleted; and (ii) for the existing sub-section (1), the following shall be substituted, namely:- "(1) A clearing or forwarding agent who in the course of his business renders his service for booking or taking delivery of any consignment of goods liable to tax or handles any document of title relating to goods liable to tax, shall furnish information about his place of business to the Assistant Commissioner or the Commercial Taxes Officer, as the case may be, in whose territorial jurisdiction he conducts his business, within such time, in such form and in such manner as may be prescribed.".
Rajasthan Finance Act, 2011_Section 14--> State(s): Rajasthan In sub-section (7) of section 83 of the principal Act, for the existing punctuation mark ".", appearing at the end, the punctuation mark ":" shall be substituted and thereafter the following new proviso shall be added, namely:- "Provided that no security under this section shall be required to be furnished by a department of the Central Government or the State Government or a public sector undertaking, corporation or company owned or controlled by the Central Government or the State Government.".
Rajasthan Finance Act, 2011_Section 15--> State(s): Rajasthan After the existing section 97A and before the existing section 98 of the principal Act, the following new section shall be inserted, namely:- "97B. Delegation of powers. - The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the notification, any power exercisable by an assessing authority under this Act may be exercised by such officer of the State Government, as may be specified in the notification.".
Rajasthan Finance Act, 2011_Section 16--> State(s): Rajasthan In section 3 of the Rajasthan Entertainments and Advertisements Tax Act, 1957 (Act No. 24 of 1957), hereinafter in this Chapter referred to as the principal Act,- (i) for the existing clause (5), the following shall be substituted and shall be deemed to have been substituted with effect from 25-2-2008, namely:- "(5) "entertainment" includes,- (i) any exhibition (show), performance, amusement, game or sport to which persons are admitted for payment; (ii) providing cable service to a subscriber; (iii) providing direct to home broadcasting service;"; and (ii) in clause (6), after the existing expression "section 4" and before the existing expression "and includes", the expression ", 4AA and 4AAA" shall be inserted; and the expression "4AA" shall be deemed to have been inserted with effect from 26-3-1999 and the expression "4AAA" shall be deemed to have been inserted with effect from 25-2-2008.
Rajasthan Finance Act, 2011_Section 17--> State(s): Rajasthan For the existing section 5 of the principal Act, the following shall be substituted and shall be deemed to have been substituted with effect from 26-3-1999, namely:- "5. Manner of payment of tax. - (1) Subject to other provisions of this Act, the entertainment tax shall be levied, calculated, and paid in such manner and within such time as may be prescribed. (2) The entertainment tax shall be due and recoverable from the proprietor. (3) The proprietor shall submit such returns, to such authority, in such manner and within such period as may be prescribed.".
Rajasthan Finance Act, 2011_Section 18--> State(s): Rajasthan In sub-section (2) of section 5B of the principal Act, after the existing expression "sections 4, 4-A" and before the existing expression "and 6-A", the expression ", 4AA, 4AAA" shall be inserted; and the expression "4AA" shall be deemed to have been inserted with effect from 26-3-1999 and the expression "4AAA" shall be deemed to have been inserted with effect from 25-2-2008.
Rajasthan Finance Act, 2011_Section 19--> State(s): Rajasthan In clause (a) of section 9-A of the principal Act, after the existing expression "section 4, 4-A" and before the existing expression "or 6-A", the expression, "4AA, 4AAA" shall be inserted; and the expression "4AA" shall be deemed to have been inserted with effect from 26-3-1999 and the expression "4AAA" shall be deemed to have been inserted with effect from 25-2-2008.
Rajasthan Finance Act, 2011_Section 20--> State(s): Rajasthan Notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of any Court, Board or other Authority, all things done, actions taken, or orders made before the date of commencement of this Act, shall, in so far as they are in conformity with the provisions of the principal Act as amended by this Act, be deemed to have been done, or taken, or made under the provisions of the principal Act as if the provisions of principal Act as amended by this Act were in force at the time such things were done, actions taken or orders made.
Rajasthan Finance Act, 2011_Section 21--> State(s): Rajasthan For the existing proviso (3) of section 3 of the Rajasthan Electricity (Duty) Act, 1962 (Act No. 12 of 1962), hereinafter in this Chapter referred to as the principal Act, the following shall be substituted, namely:- "(3) Where the State Government is of opinion that it is necessary or expedient in the public interest to do so, it may by notification in the Official Gazette and on such terms, conditions and restrictions as may be laid down in the notification, reduce or remit, whether prospectively or retrospectively,- (a) the electricity duty on the energy consumed- (i) by a consumer in any industry in the manufacture, production, processing or repair of goods; (ii) by a person generating energy for his own use or consumption; (iii) by or in respect of any mine as defined in the Mines Act, 1952 (Central Act No. 35 of 1952); (b) the electricity duty on the energy consumed by or in respect of any Municipality or Panchayati Raj Institutions or other local authority, for the purpose or in respect of public street lighting; (c) the electricity duty on the energy consumed by such other class of consumers as may be prescribed by the State Government, subject, however, in the case of clause (a), to the condition that any reduction or remission so made shall not be applicable to energy consumed in respect of any premises used for commercial or residential purposes.".
Rajasthan Finance Act, 2011_Section 22--> State(s): Rajasthan In sub-section (1) of section 3C of the principal Act, for the existing expression "ten paise", the expression "fifteen paise" shall be substituted.
Rajasthan Finance Act, 2011_Section 23--> State(s): Rajasthan In section 2 of the Rajasthan Stamp Act, 1998 (Act No. 14 of 1999), hereinafter in this Chapter referred to as the principal Act,- (i) for the existing clause (viii-A), the following shall be substituted, namely:- "(viii-A) "Chief Controlling Revenue Authority" means Rajasthan Tax Board constituted under section 88 of the Rajasthan Value Added Tax Act, 2003 (Act No. 4 of 2003); "; (ii) for the existing sub-clause (iv) of clause (xi), the following shall be substituted, namely:- "(iv) every order made under section 394 of the Companies Act, 1956 (Central Act No. 1 of 1956),"; and (iii) for the existing expression "(xxxvi) 'stock exchange' means", appearing at the end, the expression "(xxxvii) 'stock exchange' means" shall be substituted and shall be deemed always to have been substituted.
Rajasthan Finance Act, 2011_Section 24--> State(s): Rajasthan After the existing section 3 and before the existing section 4 of the principal Act, the following new section shall be inserted, namely.- "3-A. Certain instruments chargeable with surcharge. - (1) All instruments of conveyance, exchange, gift, settlement, partition, agreement to sale, composition, mortgage, release, power of attorney and lease of immovable property, and agreement or memorandum of an agreement relating to giving authority or power to a promoter or a developer, by whatever name called, for construction on, or development of, any immovable property, chargeable with duty under section 3 read with Schedule to the Act, shall be chargeable with surcharge at such rate not exceeding 10 percent of the duty chargeable on such instruments under section 3 read with Schedule to the Act, as may be notified by the State Government, for the purpose of the development of basic infrastructure facilities such as rail or road transportation system, communication system, power distribution system, sewerage system, drainage system or any other such public utilities serving any area of the State and for financing Municipalities and Panchayati Raj Institutions. (2) The surcharge chargeable under sub-section (1) shall be in addition to any duty chargeable under section 3. (3) Except as otherwise provided in sub-section (1), provisions of this Act shall so far as may be apply in relation to the surcharge, chargeable under sub-section (1) as they apply in relation to the duty chargeable under section 3.".
Rajasthan Finance Act, 2011_Section 25--> State(s): Rajasthan In clause (iii) of the Article 21 of the Schedule of the principal Act, for the existing expression "amalgamation of the companies by the order of the High Court", the expression "the order" shall be substituted.
Rajasthan Finance Act, 2011_Section 26--> State(s): Rajasthan For the existing sub-section (1A) of section 9 of the Rajasthan Excise Act, 1950 (Act No. 2 of 1950), hereinafter in this Chapter referred to as the principal Act, the following shall be substituted, namely:- "(1A) The State Government may also appoint such and so many other persons as it thinks fit and necessary to be:- (i) Joint Excise Commissioner; (ii) Deputy Excise Commissioner; (iii) District Excise Officer; (iv) Assistant Excise Officer; (v) Other Excise Officers.".
Rajasthan Finance Act, 2011_Section 27--> State(s): Rajasthan For the existing section 57 of the principal Act, the following shall be substituted, namely:- "57. Penalty for possession of excisable article unlawfully imported. - Whoever, without lawful authority, has in his possession any excisable article, knowing the same to have been unlawfully imported, transported, manufactured, cultivated or collected or knowing the fact that prescribed duty not to have been paid thereon, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six months but which may extend to three years and with fine of twenty thousand rupees or five times of the loss of excise duty, which ever is higher: Provided that if the quantity of liquor found at the time or in the course of detection of the offence exceeds fifty bulk litres, the person guilty for such offence shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years but which may extend to five years and with fine of twenty thousand rupees or ten times of the loss of excise duty, which ever is higher.".
Rajasthan Finance Act, 2011_Section 28--> State(s): Rajasthan For the existing section 4-D of the Rajasthan Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1951 (Act No. 11 of 1951), hereinafter in this Chapter referred to as the principal Act, the following shall be substituted, namely:- "4-D. Levy of Green Tax. - (1) There shall be levied and collected a cess called "green tax", in addition to the tax levied under sections 4, 4-B and 4-C of the Act, on such vehicles suitable for use on road as specified in column (2), at such time as specified in column (3), of the table below at such rates, not exceeding the maximum rates specified in column (4) of the table, as may be fixed by the State Government by notification in the Official Gazette, for the purpose of implementation of various measures to control air pollution. TABLE S. No. Class of the Vehicle Time Maximum rate of cess (in Rupees) 1 2 3 4 1. Non-transport vehicle at the time of registration under section 41, or assignment under section 47 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (Central Act No. 59 of 1988) and thereafter at the time of renewal of certificate of registration under sub-section (10) of section 41 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (Central Act No. 59 of 1988).  (a) two wheelers 750.00 (b) other than two wheelers 1500.00 2. Transport vehicle at the time of registration under section 41, or assignment under section 47 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (Central Act No. 59 of 1988) and thereafter at the time of renewal of fitness certificate under section 56 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (Central Act No. 59 of 1988). 600.00 (2) The provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder excluding those relating to refund of tax shall, so far as may be, apply in relation to the imposition, payment, computation and recovery of the cess payable under sub-section (1), as they apply to the imposition, payment, computation and recovery of tax payable under this Act.".
Rajasthan Finance Act, 2011_Section 29--> State(s): Rajasthan After section 4-D, amended as aforesaid, and before section 5 of the principal Act, following new section shall be inserted, namely:- "4-E. Levy of Surcharge. - (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 4, 4-B and 4-C of the Act, the tax imposed by the said sections shall with effect from the commencement of the Rajasthan Finance Act, 2011 (Act No. 15 of 2011) be increased by a surcharge at such rates, not exceeding 20% of the said tax, as may be specified by the State Government by the notification in the Official Gazette. (2) The provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, so far as may be, apply in relation to the imposition, payment, computation, recovery, exemption and refund of the surcharge payable under sub-section (1), as they apply to the imposition, payment, computation, recovery, exemption and refund of tax payable under this Act.".
Rajasthan Finance Act, 2011_Section 30--> State(s): Rajasthan after the existing section 17 of the Rajasthan Local Fund Audit Act, 1954 (Act No. 28 of 1954), the following new section shall be added, namely:- "18. Laying of audit report. - The Director shall send to the Government annually a consolidated report of the accounts audited by him containing such matters which he intends to bring to their notice and the Government shall, after the receipt of the same, cause it to be laid before the State Legislature.". Principal Secretary to the Government. 
