Rajasthan Finance Act, 2012_Section Preamble--> State(s): Rajasthan An Act further to amend the Rajasthan Value Added Tax Act, 2003, the Rajasthan Tax on Luxuries (in Hotels and Lodging Houses) Act, 1990, the Rajasthan Tax on Entry of Goods into Local Areas Act, 1999, the Rajasthan Stamp Act, 1998 and the Rajasthan Finance Act, 2006 , in order to give effect to the financial proposals of the State Government for financial year 2012-13 and to make certain other provisions. Be it enacted by the Rajasthan State Legislature in the Sixty-third Year of the Republic of India, as follows:-
Rajasthan Finance Act, 2012_Section 1--> State(s): Rajasthan This Act may be called the Rajasthan Finance Act, 2012.
Rajasthan Finance Act, 2012_Section 2--> State(s): Rajasthan In pursuance of Section 3 of the Rajasthan Provisional Collection of Taxes Act, 1958 (Act No. 23 of 1958) it is hereby declared that it is expedient in the public interest that provisions of clauses 13 and 14 of this Bill shall have immediate effect under the said Act.
Rajasthan Finance Act, 2012_Section 3--> State(s): Rajasthan For the existing Section 22 of the Rajasthan Value Added Tax Act, 2003 (Act No. 4 of 2003), hereinafter in this Chapter referred to as the principal Act, the following shall be substituted, namely:- "22. Assessment on failure to deposit tax or submit return or audit report:- (1) Where a dealer has failed to deposit tax in accordance with the provisions of Section 20 within the notified period or has failed to submit a return in accordance with the provisions of Section 21, or an audit report in accordance with the provisions of Section 73, within the prescribed period, the assessing authority or the officer authorized by the Commissioner shall, without prejudice to the penal provisions in this Act, after making such enquiry as it may consider necessary and after giving the dealer a reasonable opportunity of being heard, assess tax for that period to the best of his judgment. (2) The tax assessed in sub-section (1), after adjustment of input tax credit and the amount deposited in advance in this behalf, if any, shall be payable by the dealer within thirty days from the date of service of the notice of demand. However, the assessing authority or the officer authorized by the Commissioner, after recording reasons in writing, may reduce such period. (a) The tax deposited under sub-section (2) shall be adjusted in the assessment for the relevant period. (4) No order under this section shall be passed after the expiry of nine months from the end of the period for which the tax has not been deposited or, as the case may be, from the last date of submission of return or audit report which has not been submitted."
Rajasthan Finance Act, 2012_Section 4--> State(s): Rajasthan The existing sub-section (4) and (4A) of Section 24 of the principal Act shall be deleted.
Rajasthan Finance Act, 2012_Section 5--> State(s): Rajasthan For the existing sub-section (4) of Section 38 of the principal Act, the following shall be substituted, namely:- "(4) Where a dealer or a person has filed an appeal to the Appellate Authority against an order passed by an assessing authority or any other officer, the said Appellate Authority may, after registering such appeal and after having heard the appellant and the assessing authority or officer or any representative thereof, stay the recovery of the disputed amount of tax or demand or any, part thereof for a period of one year from the date of such order or till the disposal of the appeal, whichever is earlier, on the condition that the said dealer or the person furnishes sufficient security to the satisfaction of the assessing authority or the officer, as the case may be, in such form and in such manner as may be prescribed. Provided that where an application for stay is not disposed of within a period of thirty days from its filing and the delay is not attributable to the applicant, the same shall be deemed to have been accepted subject to the condition that such dealer or person furnishes sufficient security to the satisfaction of the assessing authority or the officer, as the case may be, in such form and in such manner as may be prescribed: Provided further that no security under this Section shall be required to be furbished by a department of the Central Government or the State Government or a public sector undertaking, corporation or company owned or controlled by the Central Government or the State Government."
Rajasthan Finance Act, 2012_Section 6--> State(s): Rajasthan For the existing sub-section (2) of Section 63 of the principal Act, the following shall be substituted, namely:- "(2) Any officer not below the rank of an Assistant Commercial Taxes Officer as may be authorized by the Commissioner shall be empowered to recover tax and impose penalty under sub-section (1).".
Rajasthan Finance Act, 2012_Section 7--> State(s): Rajasthan The existing sub-section (2) of Section 16 of the Rajasthan Tax on Luxuries (in Hotels and Lodging Houses) Act, 1990 (Act No. 9 of 1996), hereinafter in this Chapter referred to as the principal Act, shall be deleted.
Rajasthan Finance Act, 2012_Section 8--> State(s): Rajasthan In Section 17 of the principal Act,- (i) for the existing sub-section (2), the following shall be substituted, namely- "(2) Every return furnished by a registered hotelier shall be subject to such scrutiny, as may be determined by the Commissioner, to verify its correctness and if the annual return for the year has been filed within the prescribed time, and- (i) no error is detected, the hotelier shall be deemed to have been assessed for that year on the basis of such return; (ii) any error is detected, the Luxury Tax Officer shall serve a notice in the prescribed form on the hotelier to rectify the errors and file a revised return within such period as may be specified therein and if the hotelier furnishes a revised return in terms of the notice and deposits the tax, if any, he shall be deemed to have been assessed for that year on the basis of such revised return.": (ii) the existing sub-section (3) shall be deleted; (iii) in sub-section (4), for the existing expression "sub-section (3)", the expression "clause (ii) of sub-section (2)" shall be substituted; (iv) for the existing sub-section (5), the following shall be substituted, namely- "(5) Where all the returns are filed by a registered hotelier for any year, no order of assessment under sub-section (4) in respect of that year shall be made after the expiry of two years from the end of the said year or within one year from the commencement of the Rajasthan Finance Act, 2012 (Act No ......... of 2012), whichever is later, and if for any reason such order is not made within the period aforesaid then the returns so filed shall be deemed to have been accepted as correct and complete and the assessment shall be deemed completed accordingly: Provided that where a fresh assessment is to be made in view of any order made in appeal under this Act or by the High Court or Supreme Court such assessment shall be made within two years from the date of the receipt of such order by the Luxury Tax Officer: Provided further that in computing any period of limitation laid down in this sub-section, the time during which the assessment remained stayed under the orders of any competent authority or of the High Court or of the Supreme Court shall be excluded: Provided also that the Commissioner may, in the interest of the revenue and for reasons to be recorded in writing, issue directions not to proceed with the assessment of any particular hotelier or class of hotelier for any particular period and the period covered by such direction to stay the assessment proceeding shall be excluded in computing the period of limitation laid down in this sub-section."; and (v) for the existing sub-section (6), the following shall be substituted, namely- "(6) If a registered hotelier does not furnish return in respect of any period by the prescribed date, the Luxury Tax Officer shall, at any time within two years from the end of the year in which such period occurs or within one year from the commencement of the Rajasthan Finance Act, 2012 (Act No. ... of 2012), whichever is later, after giving the hotelier a reasonable opportunity of being heard, proceed to assess to the best of his judgment the amount of the lax, if any, due from him."
Rajasthan Finance Act, 2012_Section 9--> State(s): Rajasthan In Section 12 of the Rajasthan Tax on Entry of Goods into Local Areas Act, 1999 (Act No. 13 of 1999), hereinafter in this Chapter referred to as the principal Act,- (i) for the existing sub-section (3), the following shall be substituted, namely- "(3) Every return furnished by a registered dealer shall be subject to such scrutiny as may be determined by the Commissioner, to verify its correctness and if any error is detected, the assessing authority shall serve a notice in the prescribed form on the dealer to rectify the errors and file a revised return within such period as may be specified therein. Where in pursuance of the notice issued under this sub-section, the dealer furnishes the revised return in terms of the notice and deposits the tax, if any, he shall be deemed to have been assessed under sub-section (1) of Section 14, on the basis of the revised return. (3A) Where in pursuance of the notice issued under sub-section (3), the dealer does not file revised return or the return filed by the dealer is not in terms of the notice, the assessing authority shall assess the dealer to the best of his judgment on the basis of material available on record."; (ii) for the existing sub-section (4), the following shall be substituted, namely:- "(4) If no return is submitted by the dealer under sub-section (1) within the period prescribed or the dealer has failed to deposit tax in accordance with Section 17 within the prescribed time, the assessing authority shall assess the dealer to the best of his judgment: Provided that before taking action under this sub-section, the dealer shall be given reasonable opportunity of being heard."; and (iii) in sub-section (6) for the existing expression "three years from the date on which return for that year is submitted by a dealer", the expression "two years from the end of the relevant year or within one year from the commencement of the Rajasthan Finance Act, 2012 (Act No of 2012), whichever is later, however, the Commissioner may for reasons to be recorded in writing extend in any particular case, such time limit by a period not exceeding six months" shall be substituted.
Rajasthan Finance Act, 2012_Section 10--> State(s): Rajasthan For the existing Section 14 of the principal Act, the following shall be substituted, namely:- "14. Self Assessment:- (1) Every registered dealer who has filed annual return for the year within the prescribed time shall, subject to the provisions of Section 12, be deemed to have been assessed for that year on the basis of annual return filed. (2) The list of the registered dealers assessed under sub-section (1) may be published through electronic or print media and such publication shall be deemed to be due intimation to such dealers wherever required.".
Rajasthan Finance Act, 2012_Section 11--> State(s): Rajasthan The existing Section 16 of the principal Act shall be deleted.
Rajasthan Finance Act, 2012_Section 12--> State(s): Rajasthan In sub-section (1) of Section 28 of the principal Act, for the existing expression "five years from the date of any order passed by it", the expression "four years from the date of any order passed by it or within one year from the commencement of the Rajasthan Finance Act, 2012 (Act No of 2012), whichever is later." shall be ssubstituted.
Rajasthan Finance Act, 2012_Section 13--> State(s): Rajasthan For the existing sub clause "(iv) of clause (xi) of Section 2 of the Rajasthan Stamp Act, 1998 (Act No. 14 of 1999), hereinafter in this Chapter referred to as the principal Act, the following shall be substituted, namely - "(iv) every order made under Section 394 of the Companies Act, 1956 (Central Act No. 1 of 1956) and Section 44-A of the' Banking Regulation Act; 1949 (Central Act No. 10 of 1949);".
Rajasthan Finance Act, 2012_Section 14--> State(s): Rajasthan In the Schedule of the principal Act,- (i) for the existing Article 5, the following shall be substituted, namely:- "5. Agreement or memorandum of an agreement- (a) if relating to the sale of a bill of exchange; Ten rupees. (b) if relating to the sale of a Government security or share in an incorporated company or other body corporate; Subject to a maximum two hundred rupees, ten rupees for every Rs. 10,000/- or part thereof, of the value of the security or share. (c) if relating to purchase or sale of an immovable property, when possession is neither given nor agreed to be given; Three per cent of the total consideration of the property as set forth in the agreement or memorandum of an agreement Provided that the stamp duty paid on such agreement shall at the time of execution of a conveyance in pursuance of such agreement subsequently be adjusted towards the total amount of duty chargeable on the conveyance if such conveyance deed is executed within three years from the date of agreement. (d) if relating to secure the repayment of a loan or debt made by a bank or Finance Company; (e) if relating to giving authority or power to a promoter or a developer, by whatever name called, for construction on, or development, of or sale or transfer (in any manner whatsoever) of, any immovable property; The same duty as on Conveyance (No.21) on the market value of the property: Provided that the provisions of Section 51 shall, mutatis mutandis, apply to such agreement or memorandum of an agreement as they apply to an instrument under that section. Provided further that if the proper stamp duty is paid under clause (eee) of Article 44 on a power of attorney executed between the same parties in respect of the same property then, the stamp duty under this Article shall be one hundred rupees. (f) if relating to project under Built, Operate and Transfer (BOT) system, whether with or without toll or fee collection rights; 0.2 per cent on the amount agreed in the contract subject to minimum of one hundred rupees. (g) if not otherwise provided for; Exemption: Agreement or memorandum of agreement- One hundred rupees. (a) for or relating to the sale of goods and merchandise exclusively, not being a Note or Memorandum chargeable under No. 40; (b) made in the form of tenders to the Government for or relating to any loan." (ii) in clause (iii) of Article 21, for the existing expression "if relating to the order under Section 394 of the Companies Act, 1956 (Central Act No. 1 of 1956)", the expression "if relating to the order under Section 394 of the Companies Act, 1956 (Central Act No. 1 of 1956), or Section 44-A of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (Central Act No. 10 of 1949)", shall be substituted; (iii) in Explanation (ii) or Article 21, for the existing expression "paid for such amalgamation", the expression "paid for such amalgamation or reconstruction, as the case may be" shall be substituted; (iv) for the existing Article 43, the following shall be substituted, namely:- "43. Partnership- (a) where there is no share contribution in partnership or where such share contribution brought in by way of cash does not exceed Rs.50,000/-; Five hundred rupees. (b) where such share contribution brought in by way of cash is in excess of Rs.50,000/-, for every Rs.50,000/-, or part thereof; Five hundred rupees, subject to maximum duty of rupees five thousand. (c) where such share contribution is brought in by way of immovable property. The same duty as on Conveyance (No. 21) on the market value of such property. (2) Dissolution of partnership or retirement of partner,- (a) where on a dissolution of the partnership or on retirement of a partner any property is taken as his share by a partner other than a partner who brought in that property as his share of contribution in the partnership; The same duty as on Conveyance (No. 21) on the market value of such the property, subject to a minimum of rupees one hundred. (b) in any other case. Five hundred rupee."; (v) after the existing clause (ee) and before the existing clause (f) of Article 44, the following shall be inserted, namely- "(eee) when given to promoter or developer by whatever name called, for construction on, or development of, or sale or transfer (in any manner whatsoever) of, any immovable property. The same duty as on Conveyance (No. 21) on the market value of such property: Provided that the provisions of Section 51 shall, mutatis mutandis, apply to such an instrument of power of attorney as they apply to a conveyance under that section: Provided further that when, proper stamp duty is paid under clause (e) of Article 5 on an agreement or memorandum of an agreement executed between the same parties and in respect of the same property, the duty chargeable under this clause shall be rupees one hundred."; (vi) for the existing Article 51, the following shall be substituted, namely- "51. Settlement.- (A) Instrument of, including a deed of dower,- (i) where the settlement is made for a religious or charitable purpose; The same duty as on Bond (No. 14) for a sum equal to the amount settled or the market value of the property settled. (ii) in any other case,- (i) in respect of immovable property, the same duty as on Conveyance (No. 21(i)) for a sum equal to the market value of the immovable property settled; and (ii) in respect of other property or amount, the same duty as on Bond (No. 14) for a sum equal to the amount settled or the market value of the property settled : Provided that where an agreement to settled is stamped with the stamp required, for an instrument of settlement in pursuance of such agreement is subsequently executed, the duty on such instrument shall not exceed one hundred rupees: Provided further that where an instrument of settlement contains any provisions for the revocation of the settlement, the amount or the value of the property settled shall, for the purposes of duty, be determined, as if no such provisions were contained in the instrument. Exemption: Deed of dower executed on the occasion of or in connection with, marriage between Mohammedans, executed before or after the marriage. (B) Revocation of,- (i) in respect of settlement described in sub-clause (i) of clause (A). The same duty as on Bond (No. 14) for a sum equal to the amount settled or the market value of the property opined as set forth in the instrument of revocation, but not exceeding fifty rupees. (ii) in respect of settlement described in sub- clause (ii) of clause (A); (i) in respect of immovable property, the same duty as on Conveyance (No. 21(i)) for a consideration equal to the market value of the immovable property concerned, and (ii) in respect of other property or amount, the same duty as on Bond (No. 14) for a consideration equal to the amount settled in the instrument of revocation or the market value of the property concerned, but not exceeding five thousand rupees"; and (vii) for the existing Article 56, the following shall be substituted, namely:- "56. Trust,- (A) Declaration of or concerning, any property when made by any writing not being a Will,- (a) where there is disposition of property,- (i) where the Trust is made for a religious or charitable purpose; The same duty as on Bond (No. 14) for a sum equal to the amount settled or the market value of the property settled. (ii) in any other case (i) in respect of immovable property, the same duty as on Conveyance (No. 21(1)) for a sum equal to the market value of the immovable property settled; and (ii) in respect of other property or amount, the same duty as on Bond (No. 14) for a sum equal to the amount settled or the market value of the property settled. (b) where there is no disposition of property,- The same duty as on Bond (No. 14) for a sum equal to the amount or value of the property concerned but not exceeding sixty rupees.". B. Revocation of-of, or concerning any property when made by any instrument other than a Will. The same duty as on Bond (No. 14) for a sum equal to the amount or value of the property concerned but not exceeding fifty rupees.".
Rajasthan Finance Act, 2012_Section 15--> State(s): Rajasthan In Section 12 of the Rajasthan Finance Act, 2006 (Act No.4 of 2006), hereinafter-in this Chapter referred to as the principal Act, (i) in sub-section (3), for the existing expression "any appeal under Section 48, for any revision under Section 51", the expression "any appeal under Section 18 or Section 51" shall be substituted; and (ii) in sub-section (4), for the existing expression "any appeal under Section 48, for any revision under Section 51", the expression "any appeal under Section 48 or Section 51" shall be substituted.
Rajasthan Finance Act, 2012_Section 16--> State(s): Rajasthan In proviso to sub-section (1) of Section 18 of the principal Act, for the existing expression "payment of not less than one half of the tax assessed", the expression "payment of twenty five percent of the tax assessed" shall be substituted.
Rajasthan Finance Act, 2012_Section 17--> State(s): Rajasthan For the existing Section 51 of the principal Act, the following shall be substituted, namely;- "51. Appeal to Rajasthan Tax Board:- (1) An appeal shall lie to the Rajasthan Tax Board constituted under Section 88 of the Rajasthan Value Added Tax Act, 2003 (Act No. 4 of 2003) against an order passed under Sec. 48 or 50 within a period of sixty days from the date of the order sought to be appealed against. (2) The Rajasthan Tax Board may admit an appeal after the expiry of the period referred to in sub-section (1), if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal within that period. (3) Every appeal wider this section shall be presented and verified in the manner prescribed. (4) The Rajasthan Tax Board may, after affording an opportunity of being heard to the parties, pass such order on the appeal as it thinks fit.". 
